All these things were torture to the heart of Isabella and to her
parents, who saw their new-found happiness so soon disturbed. The lady
keeper advised the queen that to prevent the mischief which might break
out between her own family and Richard's, the possible cause of it
should be withdrawn, by sending Isabella to Spain. In support of this
suggestion she added that Isabella was a Catholic, and so rooted in that
faith, that all the arguments and persuasions she had used to withdraw
her from it, and they were many, were of no avail. The queen replied
that she esteemed her the more, since she was steadfast to the law
taught her by her parents; and that as for sending her to Spain, it was
not to be thought of, for she was charmed with her lovely presence and
her many graces and virtues. In fine, the queen was resolved that
Isabella should become Richard's wife, if not that day, on another,
without fail. The lady keeper was so mortified by this reply that she
withdrew without saying a word; and having already made up her mind that
unless Isabella was removed there could be no hope of relief for her son
or of peace between him and Richard, she determined to commit one of the
most atrocious acts that could enter the mind of a lady of her exalted
station.

Women being, for the most part, rash and sudden in the execution of
their resolves, the lady keeper that evening gave Isabella poison in a
conserve which she pressed her to take, under the pretence that it was
good for the sinking and oppression of the heart which she complained
of. A short while after Isabella had swallowed it her throat and tongue
began to swell, her lips turned black, her voice became hoarse, her eyes
fixed and glassy, and her breathing laboured and stertorous: in short,
she exhibited all the symptoms of having been poisoned. The queen's
ladies hastened to inform her majesty, assuring her that the lady keeper
had been the author of the nefarious deed.

The queen had no great difficulty in coming to the same conclusion, and
went at once to see Isabella, who seemed to be almost at the last gasp.
Sending with all speed for her physicians, she, meanwhile, ordered that
the sufferer should be given a quantity of powdered unicorn's horn and
several other antidotes, with which great princes are usually provided
against such casualties. The physicians arrived and begged the queen to
make the lady keeper declare what kind of poison she had used (for no
one doubted that she was the poisoner). This information having been
obtained from the criminal, the physician applied the proper remedies
with such good effect that, with God's help, Isabella's life was saved,
or at least there was a hope that it would be so.

The queen ordered that the lady keeper should be arrested and confined
in a chamber of the palace, intending to punish her as her crime
deserved; whilst the guilty woman thought to excuse herself by saying
that in killing Isabella she offered an acceptable sacrifice to heaven
by ridding the world of a Catholic, and removing with her the cause of
affliction to her son. Finally, Isabella did not die; but she escaped
only with the loss of her hair, eyebrows, and eyelashes, her face
swollen, her bloom gone, her skin blotched and blistered, and her eyes
red and humid. In a word, she was now become an object as loathsome to
look at as she had before been surpassingly beautiful. The change was so
frightful that those who knew her thought it would have been better had
the poison killed her. But notwithstanding all this, Richard supplicated
the queen to let him take her home with him, for the great love he bore
her comprehended not only her body but her soul, and if Isabella had
lost her beauty, she could not have lost her infinite virtues. "Be it
so," said the queen. "Take her, Richard, and reckon that you take in her
a most precious jewel, in a rough wooden casket. God knows how gladly I
would give her to you as I received her; but since that is impossible,
perhaps the punishment I will inflict on the perpetrator of the crime
will be some satisfaction to your feelings."

Richard spoke earnestly in the culprit's behalf, and besought her
majesty to pardon her. Finally, Isabella and her parents were consigned
to his care, and he took them home to his father's house, the queen
having added to the fine pearls and the diamonds she had bestowed on
Isabella other jewels and rich dresses, such as manifested the great
affection she felt for her. Isabella remained for two months in the same
state, without the least sign appearing that her beauty would ever
return; but at the end of that time her skin began to peel off, and she
gradually recovered the natural bloom of her lovely complexion.
Meanwhile, Richard's parents, thinking it impossible that Isabella
should ever again be what she had been, determined to send for the
Scotch lady, to whom they had at first intended to unite him. They did
not doubt that the actual beauty of the new bride would make their son
forget the lost beauty of her rival, whom they intended to send to Spain
with her parents, giving them so much wealth as would compensate them
for their past losses. All this was settled between them without
Richard's knowledge, and soon after the new bride entered their doors,
duly accompanied, and so beautiful that none could compare with her in
London, now that Isabella's charms were gone.


