"All these things have I told you, generous youth, that you may not be
ignorant of the life to which you are come, and the manners and customs
you will have to profess, which I have here sketched for you in the
rough. Many other particulars, no less worthy of consideration, you will
discover for yourself in process of time."

Here the eloquent old gitano closed his discourse, and the novice
replied, that he congratulated himself much on having been made
acquainted with such laudable statutes; that he desired to make
profession of an order so based on reason and politic principles; that
his only regret was that he had not sooner come to the knowledge of so
pleasant a life; and that from that moment he renounced his knighthood,
and the vain glory of his illustrious lineage, and placed them beneath
the yoke, or beneath the laws under which they lived, forasmuch as they
so magnificently recompensed the desire he had to serve them, in
bestowing upon him the divine Preciosa, for whom he would surrender many
crowns and wide empires, or desire them only for her sake.

Preciosa spoke next: "Whereas these se単ores, our lawgivers," she said,
"have determined, according to their laws that I should be yours, and as
such have given me up to you, I have decreed, in accordance with the law
of my own will, which is the strongest of all, that I will not be so
except upon the conditions heretofore concerted between us two. You must
live two years in our company before you enjoy mine, so that you may
neither repent through fickleness, nor I be deceived through
precipitation. Conditions supersede laws; those which I have prescribed
you know; if you choose to keep them, I may be yours, and you mine; if
not, the mule is not dead, your clothes are whole, and not a doit of
your money is spent. Your absence from home has not yet extended to the
length of a day; what remains you may employ in considering what best
suits you. These se単ores may give up my body to you, but not my soul,
which is free, was born free, and shall remain free. If you remain, I
shall esteem you much; if you depart, I shall do so no less; for I hold
that amorous impulses run with a loose rein, until they are brought to a
halt by reason or disenchantment. I would not have you be towards me
like the sportsman, who when he has bagged a hare thinks no more of it,
but runs after another. The eyes are sometimes deceived; at first sight
tinsel looks like gold; but they soon recognise the difference between
the genuine and the false metal. This beauty of mine, which you say I
possess, and which you exalt above the sun, and declare more precious
than gold, how do I know but that at a nearer view it will appear to you
a shadow, and when tested will seem but base metal? I give you two years
to weigh and ponder well what will be right to choose or reject. Before
you buy a jewel, which you can only get rid of by death, you ought to
take much time to examine it, and ascertain its faults or its merits. I
do not assent to the barbarous licence which these kinsmen of mine have
assumed, to forsake their wives or chastise them when the humour takes
them; and as I do not intend to do anything which calls for punishment,
I will not take for my mate one who will abandon me at his own caprice."

"You are right, Preciosa," said Andrew; "and so if you would have me
quiet your fears and abate your doubts, by swearing not to depart a jot
from the conditions you prescribe, choose what form of oath I shall
take, or what other assurance I shall give you, and I will do exactly as
you desire."

"The oaths and promises which the captive makes to obtain his liberty
are seldom fulfilled when he is free," returned Preciosa; "and it is
just the same, I fancy, with the lover, who to obtain his desire will
promise the wings of Mercury, and the thunderbolts of Jove; and indeed a
certain poet promised myself no less, and swore it by the Stygian lake.
I want no oaths or promises, Se単or Andrew, but to leave everything to
the result of this novitiate. It will be my business to take care of
myself, if at any time you should think of offending me."

"Be it so," said Andrew. "One request I have to make of these se単ores
and comrades mine, and that is that they will not force me to steal
anything for a month or so; for it strikes me that it will take a great
many lessons to make me a thief."

"Never fear, my son," said the old gipsy; "for we will instruct you in
such a manner that you will turn out an eagle in our craft; and when you
have learned it, you will like it so much, that you will be ready to eat
your hand, it will so itch after it. Yes, it is fine fun to go out
empty-handed in the morning, and to return loaded at night to the
rancho."

"I have seen some return with a whipping," said Andrew.

"One cannot catch trouts dry shod," the old man replied: "all things in
this life have their perils: the acts of the thief are liable to the
galleys, whipping, and the scragging-post; but it is not because one
ship encounters a storm, or springs a leak, that others should cease to
sail the seas. It would be a fine thing if there were to be no soldiers,
because war consumes men and horses. Besides, a whipping by the hand of
justice is for us a badge of honour, which becomes us better worn on the
shoulders than on the breast. The main point is to avoid having to dance
upon nothing in our young days and for our first offences; but as for
having our shoulders dusted, or thrashing the water in a galley, we
don't mind that a nutshell. For the present, Andrew, my son, keep snug
in the nest under the shelter of our wings; in duo time, we will take
you out to fly, and that where you will not return without a prey; and
the short and the long of it is, that by and by you will lick your
fingers after every theft."

"Meanwhile," said Andrew, "as a compensation for what I might bring in
by thieving during the vacation allowed me, I will divide two hundred
gold crowns among all the members of the rancho."

The words were no sooner out of his mouth, than several gitanos caught
him up in their arms, hoisted him upon their shoulders, and bore him
along, shouting, "Long life to the great Andrew, and long life to
Preciosa his beloved!" The gitanas did the same with Preciosa, not
without exciting the envy of Christina, and the other gitanillas
present; for envy dwells alike in the tents of barbarians, the huts of
shepherds, and the palaces of princes; and to see another thrive who
seems no better than oneself is a great weariness to the spirit.

This done, they ate a hearty dinner, made an equitable division of the
gift money, repeated their praises of Andrew, and exalted Preciosa's
beauty to the skies. When night fell, they broke the mule's neck, and
buried it, so as to relieve Andrew of all fear of its leading to his
discovery; they likewise buried with it the trappings, saddle, bridle,
girths and all, after the manner of the Indians, whose chief ornaments
are laid in the grave with them.

Andrew was in no small astonishment at all he had seen and heard, and
resolved to pursue his enterprise without meddling at all with the
customs of his new companions, so far as that might be possible.
Especially he hoped to exempt himself, at the cost of his purse, from
participating with them in any acts of injustice. On the following day,
Andrew requested the gipsies to break up the camp, and remove to a
distance from Madrid; for he feared that he should be recognised if he
remained there. They told him they had already made up their minds to go
to the mountains of Toledo, and thence to scour all the surrounding
country, and lay it under contribution. Accordingly they struck their
tents, and departed, offering Andrew an ass to ride; but he chose rather
to travel on foot, and serve as attendant to Preciosa, who rode
triumphantly another ass, rejoicing in her gallant esquire; whilst he
was equally delighted at finding himself close to her whom he had made
the mistress of his freedom.


