"About twenty years after the ascension of our Saviour, it came to
pass, that there was seen by the people of Renfusa, (a city upon the
eastern coast of our island,) within night, (the night was cloudy, and
calm,) as it might be some mile into the sea, a great pillar of light;
not sharp, but in form of a column, or cylinder, rising from the sea a
great way up towards heaven; and on the top of it was seen a large
cross of light, more bright and resplendent than the body of the
pillar.  Upon which so strange a spectacle, the people of the city
gathered apace together upon the sands, to wonder; and so after put
themselves into a number of small boats, to go nearer to this
marvellous sight.  But when the boats were come within (about) sixty
yards of the pillar, they found themselves all bound, and could go no
further; yet so as they might move to go about, but might not approach
nearer: so as the boats stood all as in a theatre, beholding this light
as an heavenly sign.  It so fell out, that there was in one of the
boats one of the wise men, of the society of Salomon's House; which
house, or college (my good brethren) is the very eye of this kingdom;
who having awhile attentively and devoutly viewed and contemplated this
pillar and cross, fell down upon his face; and then raised himself upon
his knees, and lifting up his hands to heaven, made his prayers in this
manner.

"'LORD God of heaven and earth, thou hast vouchsafed of thy grace to
those of our order, to know thy works of Creation, and the secrets of
them: and to discern (as far as appertaineth to the generations of men)
between divine miracles, works of nature, works of art, and impostures
and illusions of all sorts.  I do here acknowledge and testify before
this people, that the thing which we now see before our eyes is thy
Finger and a true Miracle.  And forasmuch as we learn in our books that
thou never workest miracles, but to divine and excellent end, (for the
laws of nature are thine own laws, and thou exceedest them not but upon
great cause,) we most humbly beseech thee to prosper this great sign,
and to give us the interpretation and use of it in mercy; which thou
dost in some part secretly promise by sending it unto us.'

"When he had made his prayer, he presently found the boat he was in,
moveable and unbound; whereas all the rest remained still fast; and
taking that for an assurance of leave to approach, he caused the boat
to be softly and with silence rowed towards the pillar.  But ere he
came near it, the pillar and cross of light brake up, and cast itself
abroad, as it were, into a firmament of many stars; which also vanished
soon after, and there was nothing left to be seen, but a small ark, or
chest of cedar, dry, and not wet at all with water, though it swam.
And in the fore-end of it, which was towards him, grew a small green
branch of palm; and when the wise man had taken it, with all reverence,
into his boat, it opened of itself, and there were found in it a Book
and a Letter; both written in fine parchment, and wrapped in sindons of
linen.  The Book contained all the canonical books of the Old and New
Testament, according as you have them; (for we know well what the
churches with you receive); and the Apocalypse itself, and some other
books of the New Testament, which were not at that time written, were
nevertheless in the Book.  And for the Letter, it was in these words:

"'I, Bartholomew, a servant of the Highest, and Apostle of Jesus
Christ, was warned by an angel that appeareth to me, in a vision of
glory, that I should commit this ark to the floods of the sea.
Therefore I do testify and declare unto that people where God shall
ordain this ark to come to land, that in the same day is come unto them
salvation and peace and good-will, from the Father, and from the Lord
Jesus.'

"There was also in both these writings, as well the Book, as the
Letter, wrought a great miracle, conform to that of the Apostles, in
the original Gift of Tongues.  For there being at that time in this
land Hebrews, Persians, and Indians, besides the natives, every one
read upon the Book, and Letter, as if they had been written in his own
language.  And thus was this land saved from infidelity (as the
remainder of the old world was from water) by an ark, through the
apostolical and miraculous evangelism of Saint Bartholomew."  And here
he paused, and a messenger came, and called him from us.  So this was
all that passed in that conference.

The next day, the same governor came again to us, immediately after
dinner, and excused himself, saying; "That the day before he was called
from us, somewhat abruptly, but now he would make us amends, and spend
time with us if we held his company and conference agreeable." We
answered, "That we held it so agreeable and pleasing to us, as we
forgot both dangers past and fears to come, for the time we hear him
speak; and that we thought an hour spent with him, was worth years of
our former life."  He bowed himself a little to us, and after we were
set again, he said; "Well, the questions are on your part."

One of our number said, after a little pause; that there was a matter,
we were no less desirous to know, than fearful to ask, lest we might
presume too far.  But encouraged by his rare humanity towards us, (that
could scarce think ourselves strangers, being his vowed and professed
servants,) we would take the hardiness to propound it: humbly
beseeching him, if he thought it not fit to be answered, that he would
pardon it, though he rejected it.  We said; "We well observed those his
words, which he formerly spake, that this happy island, where we now
stood, was known to few, and yet knew most of the nations of the world;
which we found to be true, considering they had the languages of
Europe, and knew much of our state and business; and yet we in Europe,
(notwithstanding all the remote discoveries and navigations of this
last age), never heard of the least inkling or glimpse of this island.
This we found wonderful strange; for that all nations have
inter-knowledge one of another, either by voyage into foreign parts, or
by strangers that come to them: and though the traveller into a foreign
country, doth commonly know more by the eye, than he that stayeth at
home can by relation of the traveller; yet both ways suffice to make a
mutual knowledge, in some degree, on both parts.  But for this island,
we never heard tell of any ship of theirs that had been seen to arrive
upon any shore of Europe; nor of either the East or West Indies; nor
yet of any ship of any other part of the world, that had made return
from them.  And yet the marvel rested not in this.  For the situation
of it (as his lordship said) in the secret conclave' of such a vast sea
might cause it.  But then, that they should have knowledge of the
languages, books, affairs, of those that lie such a distance from them,
it was a thing we could not tell what to make of; for that it seemed to
us a conditioner and propriety of divine powers and beings, to be
hidden and unseen to others, and yet to have others open and as in a
light to them."


