And for the country of Bensalem, this man would make no end of
commending it; being desirous, by tradition among the Jews there, to
have it believed that the people thereof were of the generations of
Abraham, by another son, whom they call Nachoran; and that Moses by a
secret Cabala ordained the Laws of Bensalem which they now use; and
that when the Messiah should come, and sit in his throne at Hierusalem,
the king of Bensalem should sit at his feet, whereas other kings should
keep a great distance.  But yet setting aside these Jewish dreams, the
man was a wise man, and learned, and of great policy, and excellently
seen in the laws and customs of that nation.

Amongst other discourses, one day I told him I was much affected with
the relation I had, from some of the company, of their custom, in
holding the Feast of the Family; for that (methought) I had never heard
of a solemnity wherein nature did so much preside.  And because
propagation of families proceedeth from the nuptial copulation, I
desired to know of him what laws and customs they had concerning
marriage; and whether they kept marriage well and whether they were
tied to one wife; for that where population is so much affected,' and
such as with them it seemed to be, there is commonly permission of
plurality of wives.

To this he said, "You have reason for to commend that excellent
institution of the Feast of the Family.  And indeed we have experience
that those families that are partakers of the blessing of that feast do
flourish and prosper ever after in an extraordinary manner.  But hear
me now, and I will tell you what I know.  You shall understand that
there is not under the heavens so chaste a nation as this of Bensalem;
nor so free from all pollution or foulness.  It is the virgin of the
world.  I remember I have read in one of your European books, of an
holy hermit amongst you that desired to see the Spirit of Fornication;
and there appeared to him a little foul ugly Aethiop. But if he had
desired to see the Spirit of Chastity of Bensalem, it would have
appeared to him in the likeness of a fair beautiful Cherubim.  For
there is nothing amongst mortal men more fair and admirable, than the
chaste minds of this people.  Know therefore, that with them there are
no stews, no dissolute houses, no courtesans, nor anything of that
kind.  Nay they wonder (with detestation) at you in Europe, which
permit such things.  They say ye have put marriage out of office: for
marriage is ordained a remedy for unlawful concupiscence; and natural
concupiscence seemeth as a spar to marriage. But when men have at hand
a remedy more agreeable to their corrupt will, marriage is almost
expulsed.  And therefore there are with you seen infinite men that
marry not, but chose rather a libertine and impure single life, than to
be yoked in marriage; and many that do marry, marry late, when the
prime and strength of their years is past. And when they do marry, what
is marriage to them but a very bargain; wherein is sought alliance, or
portion, or reputation, with some desire (almost indifferent) of issue;
and not the faithful nuptial union of man and wife, that was first
instituted.  Neither is it possible that those that have cast away so
basely so much of their strength, should greatly esteem children,
(being of the same matter,) as chaste men do.  So likewise during
marriage, is the case much amended, as it ought to be if those things
were tolerated only for necessity?  No, but they remain still as a very
affront to marriage. The haunting of those dissolute places, or resort
to courtesans, are no more punished in married men than in bachelors.
And the depraved custom of change, and the delight in meretricious
embracements, (where sin is turned into art,) maketh marriage a dull
thing, and a kind of imposition or tax.  They hear you defend these
things, as done to avoid greater evils; as advoutries, deflowering of
virgins, unnatural lust, and the like.  But they say this is a
preposterous wisdom; and they call it Lot's offer, who to save his
guests from abusing, offered his daughters: nay they say farther that
there is little gained in this; for that the same vices and appetites
do still remain and abound; unlawful lust being like a furnace, that if
you stop the flames altogether, it will quench; but if you give it any
vent, it will rage. As for masculine love, they have no touch of it;
and yet there are not so faithful and inviolate friendships in the
world again as are there; and to speak generally, (as I said before,) I
have not read of any such chastity, in any people as theirs.  And their
usual saying is, That whosoever is unchaste cannot reverence himself;
and they say, That the reverence of a man's self, is, next to religion,
the chiefest bridle of all vices."

And when he had said this, the good Jew paused a little; whereupon I,
far more willing to hear him speak on than to speak myself, yet
thinking it decent that upon his pause of speech I should not be
altogether silent, said only this; "That I would say to him, as the
widow of Sarepta said to Elias; that he was come to bring to memory our
sins; and that I confess the righteousness of Bensalem was greater than
the righteousness of Europe."  At which speech he bowed his head, and
went on in this manner:

"They have also many wise and excellent laws touching marriage.  They
allow no polygamy.  They have ordained that none do intermarry or
contract, until a month be past from their first interview.  Marriage
without consent of parents they do not make void, but they mulct it in
the inheritors: for the children of such marriages are not admitted to
inherit above a third part of their parents' inheritance.  I have read
in a book of one of your men, of a Feigned Commonwealth, where the
married couple are permitted, before they contract, to see one another
naked.  This they dislike; for they think it a scorn to give a refusal
after so familiar knowledge: but because of many hidden defects in men
and women's bodies, they have a more civil way; for they have near
every town a couple of pools, (which they call Adam and Eve's pools,)
where it is permitted to one of the friends of the men, and another of
the friends of the woman, to see them severally bathe naked."

And as we were thus in conference, there came one that seemed to be a
messenger, in a rich huke, that spake with the Jew: whereupon he turned
to me and said; "You will pardon me, for I am commanded away in haste."
The next morning he came to me again, joyful as it seemed, and said;
"There is word come to the Governor of the city, that one of the
Fathers of Salomon's House will be here this day seven-night: we have
seen none of them this dozen years.  His coming is in state; but the
cause of his coming is secret.  I will provide you and your fellows of
a good standing to see his entry."  I thanked him, and told him, I was
most glad of the news.

The day being come, he made his entry.  He was a man of middle stature
and age, comely of person, and had an aspect as if he pitied men.  He
was clothed in a robe of fine black cloth, with wide sleeves and a
cape.  His under garment was of excellent white linen down to the foot,
girt with a girdle of the same; and a sindon or tippet of the same
about his neck.  He had gloves, that were curious,'' and set with
stone; and shoes of peach-coloured velvet.  His neck was bare to the
shoulders.  His hat was like a helmet, or Spanish montera; and his
locks curled below it decently: they were of colour brown.  His beard
was cut round, and of the same colour with his hair, somewhat lighter.
He was carried in a rich chariot without wheels, litter-wise; with two
horses at either end, richly trapped in blue velvet embroidered; and
two footmen on each side in the like attire.  The chariot was all of
cedar, gilt, and adorned with crystal; save that the fore-end had
panels of sapphires, set in borders of gold; and the hinder-end the
like of emeralds of the Peru colour.  There was also a sun of gold,
radiant, upon the top, in the midst; and on the top before, a small
cherub of gold, with wings displayed.  The chariot was covered with
cloth of gold tissued upon blue.  He had before him fifty attendants,
young men all, in white satin loose coats to the mid leg; and stockings
of white silk; and shoes of blue velvet; and hats of blue velvet; with
fine plumes of diverse colours, set round like hat-bands. Next before
the chariot, went two men, bare-headed, in linen garments down the
foot, girt, and shoes of blue velvet; who carried, the one a crosier,
the other a pastoral staff like a sheep-hook; neither of them of metal,
but the crosier of balm-wood, the pastoral staff of cedar. Horsemen he
had none, neither before nor behind his chariot: as it seemeth, to
avoid all tumult and trouble.  Behind his chariot went all the officers
and principals of the companies of the city.  He sat alone, upon
cushions of a kind of excellent plush, blue; and under his foot curious
carpets of silk of diverse colours, like the Persian, but far finer.
He held up his bare hand as he went, as blessing the people, but in
silence.  The street was wonderfully well kept: so that there was never
any army had their men stand in better battle-array than the people
stood.  The windows likewise were not crowded, but every one stood in
them as if they had been placed.


