Nor had the Sons of this Prince much better Success, tho' the first
of them was a Prince mightily belov'd by his Subjects; but his
Misfortunes chiefly proceeded from his having made use of one of the
Engines so very long, that the Feathers were quite worn out, and good
for nothing: He used to make a great many Voyages and Flights into
the Moon, and then would make his Subjects give him great Sums of
Money to come down to them again; and yet they were so fond of him,
That they always complyed with him, and would give him every thing he
askt, rather than to be without him: But they grew wiser since.

At last, this Prince used his Engine so long, it could hold together
no longer; and being obliged to write to his Subjects to pick him out
some new Feathers, they did so; but withall sent him such strong
Feathers, and so stiff, that when he had placed 'em in their proper
places, and made a very beautiful Engine, it was too heavy for him
to manage: He made a great many Essays at it, and had it placed on
the top of an old Idol Chappel, dedicated to an old Bramyn Saint of
those Countries, called, Phantosteinaschap; in Latin, chap. de Saint
Stephano; or in English, St. Stephen's: Here the Prince try'd all
possible Contrivances, and a vast deal of Money it cost him; but the
Feathers were so stiff they would not work, and the Fire within was
so choaked and smother'd with its own Smoak, for want of due Vent and
Circulation, that it would not burn; so he was oblig'd to take it
down again; and from thence he carried it to his College of Bramyn
Priests, and set it up in one of their Publick Buildings: There he
drew Circles of Ethicks and Politicks, and fell to casting of Figures
and Conjuring, but all would not do, the Feathers could not be
brought to move; and, indeed, I have observ'd, That these Engines
are seldom helpt by Art and Contrivance; there is no way with them,
but to have the People spoke to, to get good Feathers; and they are
easily placed, and perform all the several Motions with the greatest
Ease and Accuracy imaginable; but it must be all Nature; any thing of
Force distorts and dislocates them, and the whole Order is spoiled;
and if there be but one Feather out of place, or pincht, or stands
wrong, the D---l would not ride in the Chariot.

The Prince thus finding his Labour in vain, broke the Engine to
pieces, and sent his Subjects Word what bad Feathers they had sent
him: But the People, who knew it was his own want of Management, and
that the Feathers were good enough, only a little stiff at first, and
with good Usage would have been brought to be fit for use, took it
ill, and never would send him any other as long as he liv'd: However,
it had this good effect upon him, That he never made any more Voyages
to the Moon as long as he reign'd.

His Brother succeeded him; and truly he was resolved upon a Voyage
to the Moon, as soon as ever he came to the Crown. He had met with
some unkind Usage from the Religious Lunesses of his own Country; and
he turn'd Abogratziarian, a zealous fiery Sect something like our
Anti-every-body-arians in England. 'Tis confest, some of the Bramyns
of his Country were very false to him, put him upon several Ways of
extending his Power over his Subjects, contrary to the Customs of
the People, and contrary to his own Interest; and when the People
expressed their Dislike of it, he thought to have been supported
by those Clergy-men; but they failed him, and made good, that Old
English Verse;

That Priests of all Religions are the same.

He took this so hainously, that he conceiv'd a just Hatred against
those that had deceiv'd him; and as Resentments seldom keep Rules,
unhappily entertain'd Prejudices against all the rest; and not
finding it easy to bring all his Designs to pass better, he resolved
upon a Voyage to the Moon.

Accordingly, he sends a Summons to all his People according to
Custom, to collect the usual quantity of Feathers for that purpose;
and because he would be sure not be used as his Brother and Father
had been, he took care to send certain Cunning-men Express, all
over the Country, to bespeak the People's Care, in collecting,
picking and culling them out, these were call'd in their Language,
Tsopablesdetoo; which being Translated may signify in English, Men of
Zeal, or Booted Apostles: Nor was this the only Caution this Prince
used; for he took care, as the Feathers were sent up to him, to
search and examine them one by one in his own Closet, to see if
they were fit for his purpose; but, alas! he found himself in his
Brother's Case exactly; and perceived, That his Subjects were
generally disgusted at his former Conduct, about Abrogratzianism,
and such things, and particularly set in a Flame by some of their
Priests, call'd, Dullobardians, or Passive-Obedience-men, who had
lately turn'd their Tale, and their Tail too upon their own Princes;
and upon this, he laid aside any more Thoughts of the Engine, but
took up a desperate and implacable Resolution, viz. to fly up to the
Moon without it; in order to this, abundance of his Cunning-men were
summon'd together to assist him, strange Engines contriv'd, and
Methods propos'd; and a great many came from all Parts, to furnish
him with Inventions and equivalent for their Journey; but all were so
preposterous and ridiculous, that his Subjects seeing him going on to
ruin himself, and by Consequence them too, unanimously took Arms; and
if their Prince had not made his Escape into a foreign Country, 'tis
thought they would have secur'd him for a Mad-man.

And here 'tis observable, That as it is in most such Cases, the mad
Councellors of this Prince, when the People begun to gather about
him, fled; and every one shifted for themselves; nay, and some of
them plunder'd him first of his Jewels and Treasure, and never were
heard of since.

From this Prince none of the Kings or Government of that Country have
ever seem'd to incline to the hazardous Attempt of the Voyage to the
Moon, at least not in such a hair-brain'd manner.

However, the Engine has been very accurately Re-built and finish'd;
and the People are now oblig'd by a Law, to send up new Feathers
every three Years, to prevent the Mischiefs which happen'd by that
Prince aforesaid, keeping one Set so long that it was dangerous to
venture with them; and thus the Engine is preserved fit for use.

And yet has not this Engine been without its continual Disasters, and
often out of repair; for though the Kings of the Country, as has been
Noted, have done riding on the back of it, yet the restless Courtiers
and Ministers of State have frequently obtained the Management of it,
from the too easy Goodness of their Masters, or the Evils of the
Times.

