About the above-mentioned year, 1702, Duncan Campbell grew a little
tired of his profession; such a multitude of followers troubled him,
several of whom were wild youths, and came to banter him, and many more
too inquisitive females to tease him with endless impertinences, and
who, the more he told them, had still the more to ask, and whose
curiosity was never to be satisfied: and besides this, he was so much
envied, and had so many malicious artifices daily practised against him,
that he resolved to leave off his profession. He had, I know, followed
it pretty closely from the time I first saw him in London, which was, I
think, in the beginning of the year 1698, till the year 1702, with very
good success; and in those few years he had got together a pretty round
sum of money. Our young seer was now at man's estate, and had learned
the notion that he was to be his own governor, so far as to be his own
counsellor too in what road of life he was to take, and this
consideration no doubt worked with a deeper impression on his mind, than
it usually does on others that are in the same blossom and pride of
manhood, because it might appear more natural for him to believe that he
had a sufficient ability to be his own proper adviser, who had given so
many others, and some more aged than himself, counsel, with very good
success. Now every experienced person knows, that when manhood is yet
green, it is still in the same dangerous condition as a young plant,
which is liable to be warped by a thousand cross fortuitous accidents,
if good measures be not taken to support it against all the contingent
shocks it may meet with from the weather or otherwise. Now, it was his
misfortune to be made averse to business, which he loved before, by
having too much of it, and to be so soured by meeting with numerous
perplexities and malicious rubs laid in his way by invidious people,
(who are the useless and injurious busy-bodies that always repine at the
good of others, and rejoice to do harm to the diligent and assiduous,
though they reap no profit by it themselves), that he was disgusted and
deterred entirely from the prosecution of a profession by which he got
not only a competent but a copious and plentiful subsistence. Nay,
indeed, this was another mischief arising to him from his having so much
business, that he had got money enough to leave it off, when the
perplexities of it had made him willing to do so, and to live very
comfortably and handsomely, like a gentleman, without it, for a time;
and we know the youngest men are not wont to look the farthest before
them, in matters that concern their own welfare. Now, inasmuch as he had
thus taken a disgust to business and application, and was surfeited, as
I may say, with the perplexities of it, it must be as natural for him,
we know, to search for repose in the contrary extreme, viz., recreation
and idleness, as it is for a man to seek rest after toil, to sleep after
a day's labour, or to sit down after a long and tiresome walk. But there
are two very distinct sorts of idleness, and two very different kinds of
recreation; there is a shameful idleness which is no better than
downright sloth; and there is a splendid kind of indolence, where a man
having taken an aversion to the wearisomeness of a business which
properly belongs to him, neglects not however to employ his thoughts,
when they are vacant from what they ought more chiefly to be about, in
other matters not entirely unprofitable in life, the exercise of which
he finds he can follow with more abundant ease and satisfaction. There
are some sorts of recreations, too, that are mean, sordid, and base;
others that are very innocent, though very diverting, and that will give
one the very next most valuable qualifications of a gentleman, after
those which are obtained by a more serious application of the mind. The
idea which I have already given my readers of our Duncan Campbell, will
easily make them judge, before I tell them, which way, in these two
ways, his genius would naturally lead him; and that, when he grew an
idle man, he would rather indulge himself with applying his mind to the
shining trifles of life, than be wholly slothful and inactive; and that
when he diverted himself he would not do it after a sordid, base
manner, as having a better taste and a relish for good company; but that
his recreations would still be the recreations of a gentleman. And just,
accordingly, as my readers would naturally judge beforehand in his case,
so it really happened. The moment he shook off business, and dismissed
the thoughts of it, his genius led him to a very gallant way of life; in
his lodgings, in his entertainments, in paying and receiving visits, in
coffee-houses, in taverns, in fencing-schools, in balls, and other
public assemblies, in all ways, in fine, both at home and abroad, Duncan
Campbell was a well-comported and civil fine gentleman; he was a man of
pleasure, and nothing of the man of business appeared about him. But a
gentleman's life, without a gentleman's estate, however shining and
pleasant it may be for a time, will certainly end in sorrow, if not in
infamy; and comparing life, as moralists do, to a day, one may safely
pronounce this truth to all the splendid idlers I have mentioned, that
if they have sunshiny weather till noon, yet the afternoon of their life
will be very stormy, rainy and uncomfortable, and perhaps just at the
end of their journey, to carry on the metaphor throughout, close in the
darkest kind of night. Of this, as I was a man of years and more
experienced in the world than he, I took upon me to forewarn Mr.
Campbell, as soon as I perceived the first dangerous fit of this elegant
idleness had seized him. But when will young men, by so much the more
headstrong as they have less of the beard, be guided and brought to
learn! and when shall we see that happy age, in which the grey heads of
old men shall be clapped upon the shoulders of youth! I told him, that
in this one thing he ought to consult me, and acknowledge me to be a
true prophet, if I told him the end of the seeming merry steps in life
he was now taking, would infallibly bring him to a labyrinth of
difficulties, out of which if he extricated himself at all, he would at
least find it a laborious piece of work. His taste had been already
vitiated with the sweets which lay at the top of the bitter draught of
fortune, and my honest rugged counsel came too late to prevail, when his
fancy had decoyed and debauched his judgment, and carried it over into
another interest. I remember I writ down to him the moral story, where
vicious Pleasure and Virtue are pictured by the philosopher to appear
before Hercules, to court him into two several paths. I told him more
particularly, since he had not an estate to go through with the
gentlemanly life, as he called it, that, if he followed the alluring
pleasures which endeavoured to tempt Hercules, he would involve himself
at last in a whole heap of miseries, out of which it would be more than
an Herculean labour for him to disentangle himself again. If he had been
a man that could have ever heard with either, I would have told the
reader in a very familiar idiom, that he turned the deaf ear to me; for
he did not mind one syllable or tittle of the prescriptions I set down
for him, no more than if he had never read them; but, varying the phrase
a little, I may say at least, when he should have looked upon my counsel
with all the eyes he had, he turned the blind side upon it. I was
resolved to make use of the revenge natural to a man of years, and
therefore applied that reproachful proverb to him, which we ancients
delight much in making use of to youths that follow their own false and
hot imaginations, and will not heed the cooler dictates of age,
experience, and wisdom. Accordingly, I wrote down to him these words,
and left him in a seeming passion: I am very well assured, young man,
you think me that am old, to be a fool; but I that am old, absolutely
know you, who are a young fellow, to be a downright fool, and so I leave
you to follow your own ways, till sad and woful experience teaches you
to know it your own self, and makes you come to me to own it of your own
accord. As I was going away, after this tart admonition and severe
reprimand, I had a mind to observe his countenance, and I saw him smile,
which I rightly construed to be done in contempt of the advice of age,
and in the gaiety and fulness of conceit, which youth entertains of its
own fond opinions and hair-brained rash resolves. He was got into the
company of a very pretty set of gentlemen, whose fortunes were far
superior to his; but he followed the same genteel exercises, as fencing,
&c., and made one at all their public entertainments; and so being at an
equal expense with those who could well afford to spend what they did
out of their estates, he went on very pleasantly for a time, still
spending and never getting, without ever considering that it must, by
inevitable consequence, fall to his lot at last to be entirely reduced
to a state of indigence and want. And what commonly heightens the
misfortune of such men, and so of all gentlemen's younger brothers, who
live upon the ready money that is given them for their portions, is,
that the prosperity they live in for a time gains them credit enough
just to bring them in debt, and render them more miserable than those
very wretches who never had either any money or credit at all. They run
themselves into debt out of shame, and to put off the evil day of
appearing ruined men as long as they can, and then, when their tempers
are soured by adversity, they grow tired of their own lives; and then,
in a quarrel, they or some other gentleman, may be, is run through, or
else being hunted by bailiffs, they exercise their swords upon those
pursuers. Thus, where gentlemen will not consider their circumstances,
their very prosperity is a cause of, and aggravates their misery; their
very pride, which was a decent pride at first, in keeping up and
maintaining their credit, subjects them too often to the lowest and the
meanest acts, and their courage, which was of a laudable kind, turns
into a brutish and savage rage; and all the fine, esteemed, flourishing,
and happy gentleman ends, and is lost in the contemned, poor and
miserable desperado, whose portion at last is confinement and a gaol,
and sometimes even worse, and what I shall not so much as name here.
Into many of these calamities Mr. Campbell had brought himself before it
was long, by his heedlessness, and running, according to the wild
dictates of youth, counter to all sound and wholesome advice. He had, it
seems, run himself into debt, and one day as he was at a coffee-house,
the sign of the Three Crowns, in Great Queen-street, in rushed four
bailiffs upon him, who being directed by the creditor's wife, had
watched him into that house, and told him they had a warrant against
him, and upon his not answering, they being unacquainted with his being
deaf and dumb, offered to seize his sword. He startled at their offering
of violence, and taking them for ruffians, which he had often met with,
repelled the assaulters, and drawing his sword, as one man, more bold
than the rest, closed in with him, he shortened his blade, and in the
fall pinned the fellow through the shoulder, and himself through the
leg, to the floor. After that he stood at bay with all the four
officers, when the most mischievous assailant of them all, the
creditor's wife, ventured to step into the fray, and very barbarously
took hold of that nameless part of the man, for which, as she was a
married woman, nature methinks should have taught her to have a greater
tenderness, and almost squeezed and crushed those vitals to death. But
at last he got free from them all, and was going away as fast as he
could, not knowing what consequences might ensue. But the woman who
aimed herself at committing murder, in the most savage and inhuman
manner, ran out after him, crying out, Murder! murder! as loud as she
could, and alarmed the whole street. The bailiffs following the woman,
and being bloody from head to foot, by means of the wound he received,
gave credit to the outcry. The late Earl Rivers's footmen happening to
be at the door, ran immediately to stop the supposed murderer, and they
indeed did take him at last, but perceived their mistake, and discovered
that instead of being assistants in taking a man whom they thought to be
a murderer endeavouring to make his escape from the hands of justice,
they had only been tricked in by that false cry to be adjutants to a
bailiff in retaking a gentleman, who, by so gallant a defence, had
rescued himself from the dangers of a prison; and when they had
discovered this their mistake they were mighty sorry for what they had
done. The most active and busy among the earl's footmen was a Dutchman,
and the earl happening to be in a room next the street, and hearing the
outcry of murder, stepped to the window, and seeing his own servants in
the midst of the bustle, examined the Dutchman how the matter was, and,
being told it, he chid the man for being concerned in stopping a
gentleman that was getting free from such troublesome companions. But
the Dutchman excused himself, like a Dutchman, by making a very merry
blunder for a reply; _Sacramente_, said he, to his lord, if I had
thought they were bailiffs, I would have fought for the poor dumb
gentlemen, but then why had he not told me they were bailiffs, my lord?


