After this feast, at which we were very innocently merry, I brought my
cargo of goods; wherein, that there might be no dispute about dividing, I
showed them that there was a sufficiency for them all, desiring that they
might all take an equal quantity, when made up, of the goods that were
for wearing.  As, first, I distributed linen sufficient to make every one
of them four shirts, and, at the Spaniard's request, afterwards made them
up six; these were exceeding comfortable to them, having been what they
had long since forgot the use of, or what it was to wear them.  I
allotted the thin English stuffs, which I mentioned before, to make every
one a light coat, like a frock, which I judged fittest for the heat of
the season, cool and loose; and ordered that whenever they decayed, they
should make more, as they thought fit; the like for pumps, shoes,
stockings, hats, &c.  I cannot express what pleasure sat upon the
countenances of all these poor men when they saw the care I had taken of
them, and how well I had furnished them.  They told me I was a father to
them; and that having such a correspondent as I was in so remote a part
of the world, it would make them forget that they were left in a desolate
place; and they all voluntarily engaged to me not to leave the place
without my consent.

Then I presented to them the people I had brought with me, particularly
the tailor, the smith, and the two carpenters, all of them most necessary
people; but, above all, my general artificer, than whom they could not
name anything that was more useful to them; and the tailor, to show his
concern for them, went to work immediately, and, with my leave, made them
every one a shirt, the first thing he did; and, what was still more, he
taught the women not only how to sew and stitch, and use the needle, but
made them assist to make the shirts for their husbands, and for all the
rest.  As to the carpenters, I scarce need mention how useful they were;
for they took to pieces all my clumsy, unhandy things, and made clever
convenient tables, stools, bedsteads, cupboards, lockers, shelves, and
everything they wanted of that kind.  But to let them see how nature made
artificers at first, I carried the carpenters to see Will Atkins' basket-
house, as I called it; and they both owned they never saw an instance of
such natural ingenuity before, nor anything so regular and so handily
built, at least of its kind; and one of them, when he saw it, after
musing a good while, turning about to me, "I am sure," says he, "that man
has no need of us; you need do nothing but give him tools."

Then I brought them out all my store of tools, and gave every man a
digging-spade, a shovel, and a rake, for we had no barrows or ploughs;
and to every separate place a pickaxe, a crow, a broad axe, and a saw;
always appointing, that as often as any were broken or worn out, they
should be supplied without grudging out of the general stores that I left
behind.  Nails, staples, hinges, hammers, chisels, knives, scissors, and
all sorts of ironwork, they had without reserve, as they required; for no
man would take more than he wanted, and he must be a fool that would
waste or spoil them on any account whatever; and for the use of the smith
I left two tons of unwrought iron for a supply.

My magazine of powder and arms which I brought them was such, even to
profusion, that they could not but rejoice at them; for now they could
march as I used to do, with a musket upon each shoulder, if there was
occasion; and were able to fight a thousand savages, if they had but some
little advantages of situation, which also they could not miss, if they
had occasion.

I carried on shore with me the young man whose mother was starved to
death, and the maid also; she was a sober, well-educated, religious young
woman, and behaved so inoffensively that every one gave her a good word;
she had, indeed, an unhappy life with us, there being no woman in the
ship but herself, but she bore it with patience.  After a while, seeing
things so well ordered, and in so fine a way of thriving upon my island,
and considering that they had neither business nor acquaintance in the
East Indies, or reason for taking so long a voyage, both of them came to
me and desired I would give them leave to remain on the island, and be
entered among my family, as they called it.  I agreed to this readily;
and they had a little plot of ground allotted to them, where they had
three tents or houses set up, surrounded with a basket-work, palisadoed
like Atkins's, adjoining to his plantation.  Their tents were contrived
so that they had each of them a room apart to lodge in, and a middle tent
like a great storehouse to lay their goods in, and to eat and to drink
in.  And now the other two Englishmen removed their habitation to the
same place; and so the island was divided into three colonies, and no
more--viz. the Spaniards, with old Friday and the first servants, at my
habitation under the hill, which was, in a word, the capital city, and
where they had so enlarged and extended their works, as well under as on
the outside of the hill, that they lived, though perfectly concealed, yet
full at large.  Never was there such a little city in a wood, and so hid,
in any part of the world; for I verify believe that a thousand men might
have ranged the island a month, and, if they had not known there was such
a thing, and looked on purpose for it, they would not have found it.
Indeed the trees stood so thick and so close, and grew so fast woven one
into another, that nothing but cutting them down first could discover the
place, except the only two narrow entrances where they went in and out
could be found, which was not very easy; one of them was close down at
the water's edge, on the side of the creek, and it was afterwards above
two hundred yards to the place; and the other was up a ladder at twice,
as I have already described it; and they had also a large wood, thickly
planted, on the top of the hill, containing above an acre, which grew
apace, and concealed the place from all discovery there, with only one
narrow place between two trees, not easily to be discovered, to enter on
that side.


