As brutish and barbarous as these fellows were at home, their stomachs
turned at this sight, and they did not know what to do.  To refuse the
prisoners would have been the highest affront to the savage gentry that
could be offered them, and what to do with them they knew not.  However,
after some debate, they resolved to accept of them: and, in return, they
gave the savages that brought them one of their hatchets, an old key, a
knife, and six or seven of their bullets; which, though they did not
understand their use, they seemed particularly pleased with; and then
tying the poor creatures' hands behind them, they dragged the prisoners
into the boat for our men.

The Englishmen were obliged to come away as soon as they had them, or
else they that gave them this noble present would certainly have expected
that they should have gone to work with them, have killed two or three of
them the next morning, and perhaps have invited the donors to dinner.  But
having taken their leave, with all the respect and thanks that could well
pass between people, where on either side they understood not one word
they could say, they put off with their boat, and came back towards the
first island; where, when they arrived, they set eight of their prisoners
at liberty, there being too many of them for their occasion.  In their
voyage they endeavoured to have some communication with their prisoners;
but it was impossible to make them understand anything.  Nothing they
could say to them, or give them, or do for them, but was looked upon as
going to murder them.  They first of all unbound them; but the poor
creatures screamed at that, especially the women, as if they had just
felt the knife at their throats; for they immediately concluded they were
unbound on purpose to be killed.  If they gave them thing to eat, it was
the same thing; they then concluded it was for fear they should sink in
flesh, and so not be fat enough to kill.  If they looked at one of them
more particularly, the party presently concluded it was to see whether he
or she was fattest, and fittest to kill first; nay, after they had
brought them quite over, and began to use them kindly, and treat them
well, still they expected every day to make a dinner or supper for their
new masters.

When the three wanderers had give this unaccountable history or journal
of their voyage, the Spaniard asked them where their new family was; and
being told that they had brought them on shore, and put them into one of
their huts, and were come up to beg some victuals for them, they (the
Spaniards) and the other two Englishmen, that is to say, the whole
colony, resolved to go all down to the place and see them; and did so,
and Friday's father with them.  When they came into the hut, there they
sat, all bound; for when they had brought them on shore they bound their
hands that they might not take the boat and make their escape; there, I
say, they sat, all of them stark naked.  First, there were three comely
fellows, well shaped, with straight limbs, about thirty to thirty-five
years of age; and five women, whereof two might be from thirty to forty,
two more about four or five and twenty; and the fifth, a tall, comely
maiden, about seventeen.  The women were well-favoured, agreeable
persons, both in shape and features, only tawny; and two of them, had
they been perfect white, would have passed for very handsome women, even
in London, having pleasant countenances, and of a very modest behaviour;
especially when they came afterwards to be clothed and dressed, though
that dress was very indifferent, it must be confessed.

