The grandmother, in her old age, was very fond of me.  At the
bottom of her fondness was the thought that, with the conspiracy
of favourable stars which attended me, I had been able to attract
my husband's love.  Were not men naturally inclined to plunge
downwards?  None of the others, for all their beauty, had been
able to prevent their husbands going headlong into the burning
depths which consumed and destroyed them.  She believed that I
had been the means of extinguishing this fire, so deadly to the
men of the family.  So she kept me in the shelter of her bosom,
and trembled if I was in the least bit unwell.

His grandmother did not like the dresses and ornaments my husband
brought from European shops to deck me with.  But she reflected:
"Men will have some absurd hobby or other, which is sure to be
expensive.  It is no use trying to check their extravagance; one
is glad enough if they stop short of ruin.  If my Nikhil had not
been busy dressing up his wife there is no knowing whom else he
might have spent his money on!"  So whenever any new dress of
mine arrived she used to send for my husband and make merry over
it.

Thus it came about that it was her taste which changed.  The
influence of the modern age fell so strongly upon her, that her
evenings refused to pass if I did not tell her stories out of
English books.

After his grandmother's death, my husband wanted me to go and
live with him in Calcutta.  But I could not bring myself to do
that.  Was not this our House, which she had kept under her
sheltering care through all her trials and troubles?  Would not a
curse come upon me if I deserted it and went off to town?  This
was the thought that kept me back, as her empty seat
reproachfully looked up at me.  That noble lady had come into
this house at the age of eight, and had died in her seventy-ninth
year.  She had not spent a happy life.  Fate had hurled shaft
after shaft at her breast, only to draw out more and more the
imperishable spirit within.  This great house was hallowed with
her tears.  What should I do in the dust of Calcutta, away from
it?

My husband's idea was that this would be a good opportunity for
leaving to my sister-in-law the consolation of ruling over the
household, giving our life, at the same time, more room to branch
out in Calcutta.  That is just where my difficulty came in.  She
had worried my life out, she ill brooked my husband's happiness,
and for this she was to be rewarded!  And what of the day when we
should have to come back here?  Should I then get back my seat at
the head?

"What do you want with that seat?"  my husband would say.  "Are
there not more precious things in life?"

Men never understand these things.  They have their nests in the
outside world; they little know the whole of what the household
stands for.  In these matters they ought to follow womanly
guidance.  Such were my thoughts at that time.

I felt the real point was, that one ought to stand up for one's
rights.  To go away, and leave everything in the hands of the
enemy, would be nothing short of owning defeat.

But why did not my husband compel me to go with him to Calcutta?
I know the reason.  He did not use his power, just because he had
it.

------

6. The seclusion of the zenana, and all the customs peculiar to
it, are designated by the general term "Purdah", which means
Screen.

7. The prestige of the daughter-in-law is of the first importance
in a Hindu household of rank [Trans.].

IF one had to fill in, little by little, the gap between day and
night, it would take an eternity to do it.  But the sun rises and
the darkness is dispelled--a moment is sufficient to overcome an
infinite distance.

One day there came the new era of __Swadeshi__ [8] in Bengal;
but as to how it happened, we had no distinct vision.  There was
no gradual slope connecting the past with the present.  For that
reason, I imagine, the new epoch came in like a flood, breaking
down the dykes and sweeping all our prudence and fear before it.
We had no time even to think about, or understand, what had
happened, or what was about to happen.

My sight and my mind, my hopes and my desires, became red with
the passion of this new age.  Though, up to this time, the walls
of the home--which was the ultimate world to my mind--remained
unbroken, yet I stood looking over into the distance, and I heard
a voice from the far horizon, whose meaning was not perfectly
clear to me, but whose call went straight to my heart.

From the time my husband had been a college student he had been
trying to get the things required by our people produced in our
own country.  There are plenty of date trees in our district.  He
tried to invent an apparatus for extracting the juice and boiling
it into sugar and treacle.  I heard that it was a great success,
only it extracted more money than juice.  After a while he came
to the conclusion that our attempts at reviving our industries
were not succeeding for want of a bank of our own.  He was, at
the time, trying to teach me political economy.  This alone would
not have done much harm, but he also took it into his head to
teach his countrymen ideas of thrift, so as to pave the way for a
bank; and then he actually started a small bank.  Its high rate
of interest, which made the villagers flock so enthusiastically
to put in their money, ended by swamping the bank altogether.

The old officers of the estate felt troubled and frightened.
There was jubilation in the enemy's camp.  Of all the family,
only my husband's grandmother remained unmoved.  She would scold
me, saying: "Why are you all plaguing him so?  Is it the fate of
the estate that is worrying you?  How many times have I seen this
estate in the hands of the court receiver!  Are men like women?
Men are born spendthrifts and only know how to waste.  Look here,
child, count yourself fortunate that your husband is not wasting
himself as well!"

My husband's list of charities was a long one.  He would assist
to the bitter end of utter failure anyone who wanted to invent a
new loom or rice-husking machine.  But what annoyed me most was
the way that Sandip Babu [9] used to fleece him on the pretext of
__Swadeshi__ work.  Whenever he wanted to start a newspaper,
or travel about preaching the Cause, or take a change of air by
the advice of his doctor, my husband would unquestioningly supply
him with the money.  This was over and above the regular living
allowance which Sandip Babu also received from him.  The
strangest part of it was that my husband and Sandip Babu did not
agree in their opinions.


