Chicot, to whom our readers will now permit us to return, after his last
adventure, went on as rapidly as possible. Between the duke and him
would now exist a mortal struggle, which would end only with life.
Mayenne, wounded in his body, and still more grievously in his
self-love, would never forgive him. Skillful in all mimicry, Chicot now
pretended to be a great lord, as he had before imitated a good
bourgeois, and thus never prince was served with more zeal than M.
Chicot, when he had sold Ernanton's horse and had talked for a quarter
of an hour with the postmaster. Chicot, once in the saddle, was
determined not to stop until he reached a place of safety, and he went
as quickly as constant fresh relays of horses could manage. He himself
seemed made of iron, and, at the end of sixty leagues, accomplished in
twenty hours, to feel no fatigue. When, thanks to this rapidity, in
three days he reached Bordeaux, he thought he might take breath. A man
can think while he gallops, and Chicot thought much. What kind of prince
was he about to find in that strange Henri, whom some thought a fool,
others a coward, and all a renegade without firmness. But Chicot's
opinion was rather different to that of the rest of the world; and he
was clever at divining what lay below the surface. Henri of Navarre was
to him an enigma, although an unsolved one. But to know that he was an
enigma was to have found out much. Chicot knew more than others, by
knowing, like the old Grecian sage, that he knew nothing. Therefore,
where most people would have gone to speak freely, and with their hearts
on their lips, Chicot felt that he must proceed cautiously and with
carefully-guarded words. All this was impressed on his mind by his
natural penetration, and also by the aspect of the country through which
he was passing. Once within the limits of the little principality of
Navarre, a country whose poverty was proverbial in France, Chicot, to
his great astonishment, ceased to see the impress of that misery which
showed itself in every house and on every face in the finest provinces
of that fertile France which he had just left. The woodcutter who passed
along, with his arm leaning on the yoke of his favorite ox, the girl
with short petticoats and quiet steps, carrying water on her head, the
old man humming a song of his youthful days, the tame bird who warbled
in his cage, or pecked at his plentiful supply of food, the brown, thin,
but healthy children playing about the roads, all said in a language
clear and intelligible to Chicot, "See, we are happy here."

Often he heard the sound of heavy wheels, and then saw coming along the
wagon of the vintages, full of casks and of children with red faces.
Sometimes an arquebuse from behind a hedge, or vines, or fig-trees, made
him tremble for fear of an ambush, but it always turned out to be a
hunter, followed by his great dogs, traversing the plain, plentiful in
hares, to reach the mountain, equally full of partridges and heathcocks.
Although the season was advanced, and Chicot had left Paris full of fog
and hoar-frost, it was here warm and fine. The great trees, which had
not yet entirely lost their leaves, which, indeed, in the south they
never lose entirely, threw deep shadows from their reddening tops.

The BÃ©arnais peasants, their caps over one ear, rode about on the
little cheap horses of the country, which seem indefatigable, go twenty
leagues at a stretch, and, never combed, never covered, give themselves
a shake at the end of their journey, and go to graze on the first tuft
of heath, their only and sufficing repast.

"Ventre de biche!" said Chicot; "I have never seen Gascony so rich. I
confess the letter weighs on my mind, although I have translated it into
Latin. However, I have never heard that Henriot, as Charles IX. called
him, knew Latin; so I will give him a free French translation."

Chicot inquired, and was told that the king was at Nerac. He turned to
the left to reach this place, and found the road full of people
returning from the market at Condom. He learned, for Chicot, careful in
answering the questions of others, was a great questioner himself, that
the king of Navarre led a very joyous life, and was always changing from
one love to another.

He formed the acquaintance of a young Catholic priest, a sheep-owner,
and an officer, who had joined company on the road, and were traveling
together. This chance association seemed to him to represent Navarre,
learned, commercial, and military.

The officer recounted to him several sonnets which had been made on the
loves of the king and the beautiful La Fosseuse, daughter of Rene de
Montmorency, baron de Fosseux.

"Oh!" said Chicot; "in Paris, we believe that the king is mad about
Mlle. de Rebours."

"Oh! that is at Pau."

"What! has the king a mistress in every town?"

"Very likely; I know that he was the lover of Mlle. de Dayelle, while I
was in garrison at Castelnaudry."

"Oh! Mlle. Dayelle, a Greek, was she not?"

"Yes," said the priest; "a Cyprian."

"I am from Agen," said the merchant; "and I know that when the king was
there he made love to Mlle. de Tignonville."

"Ventre de biche!" said Chicot; "he is a universal lover. But to return
to Mlle. Dayelle; I knew her family."

"She was jealous and was always threatening; she had a pretty little
poniard, which she used to keep on her work-table, and one day, the king
went away and carried the poniard with him, saying that he did not wish
any misfortune to happen to his successor."

"And Mlle. de Rebours?"

"Oh! they quarreled."

"Then La Fosseuse is the last?"

"Oh! mon Dieu! yes; the king is mad about her."

"But what does the queen say?"

"She carries her griefs to the foot of the crucifix," said the priest.

"Besides," said the officer, "she is ignorant of all these things."

"That is not possible," said Chicot.

"Why so?"

"Because Nerac is not so large that it is easy to hide things there."

"As for that, there is a park there containing avenues more than 3,000
feet long of cypresses, plane trees, and magnificent sycamores, and the
shade is so thick it is almost dark in broad daylight. Think what it
must be at night."

"And then the queen is much occupied."

"Occupied?"

"Yes."

"With whom, pray?"

"With God, monsieur," said the priest.

"With God?"

"Yes, the queen is religious."

"Religious! But there is no mass at the palace, is there?"

"No mass; do you take us for heathens? Learn, monsieur, that the king
goes to church with his gentlemen, and the queen hears mass in her
private chapel."

"The queen?"


