I strained my eyes in every direction, hoping to see signs of a
dwelling, or of a road, but I could only see the whirling of the
snow-drift. All at once I thought I saw some thing black. "Halloo!
coachman," I cried out, "what is that black thing yonder?"

The coachman looked attentively where I indicated. "God knows, my lord,"
he replied, re-mounting to his seat; "it is not a kibitka, nor a tree;
it seems to be moving. It must be a wolf or a man!"

I ordered him to go in the direction of the unknown object which was
coming toward us. In two minutes we were on a line with it, and I
recognized a man.

"Halloo! good man!" shouted my coachman; "tell us, do you know the
road?"

"This is the road," replied the man. "I am on solid ground, but what the
devil is the good of that."

"Listen, my good peasant," said I; "do you know this country? Can you
lead us to a shelter for the night?"

"This country! Thank God, I have been over it on foot and in carriage,
from one end to the other. But one can not help losing the road in this
weather. It is better to stop here and wait till the hurricane ceases:
then the sky will clear, and we can find the way by the stars."

His coolness gave me courage. I had decided to trust myself to the mercy
of God and pass the night on the steppe, when the traveler, seating
himself on the bench which was the coachman's seat, said to the driver:

"Thank God, a dwelling is near. Turn to the right and go on."

"Why should I turn to the right?" said the coachman, sulkily, "where do
you see a road?"

"Must I say to you these horses, as well as the harness, belong to
another? then use the whip without respite."

I thought my coachman's view rational.

"Why do you believe," said I to the new-comer, "that a dwelling is not
far off?"

"The wind blows from that quarter," said he, "and I have smelled
smoke--proof that a dwelling is near."

His sagacity, the delicacy of his sense of smell, filled me with
admiration; I ordered my coachman to go wherever the other wished. The
horses walked heavily through the deep snow. The kibitka advanced but
slowly, now raised on a hillock, now descending into a hollow, swaying
from side like a boat on a stormy sea.

Saveliitch, falling over on me every instant, moaned. I pulled down the
hood of the kibitka, wrapped myself up in my pelisse, and fell asleep,
rocked by the swaying of the vehicle, and lulled by the chant of the
tempest.

The horses stopped. Saveliitch was holding my hand.

"Come out, my lord," said he, "we have arrived."

"Where have we arrived?" said I, rubbing my eyes.

"At the shelter. God has helped us; we have stumbled right upon
the hedge of the dwelling. Come out, my lord, quick; come and warm
yourself."

I descended from the kibitka; the hurricane had not ceased, but it had
moderated; sight was useless, it was so dark. The master of the house
met us at the door, holding a lantern under the flaps of his long coat,
the Cossack cafetan. He led us into a small, though no untidy room,
lighted by a pine torch. In the centre hung a carabine and a high
Cossack cap.

Our host, a Cossack from the river Iaik, was a peasant of some sixty
years, still fresh and green.

Saveliitch brought in the case containing my tea-service; he asked for
fire to make me a few cups of tea, of which I never had greater need.
The host hastened to serve us.

"Where is our guide?" I asked of Saveliitch.

"Here, your lordship," replied a voice from above. I raised my eyes to
the loft, and saw a black beard and two sparkling black eyes.

"Well, are you cold?"

"How could I help being cold in this little cafetan full of holes.
What's the use of concealment? I had a touloup, but I left it yesterday
in pledge with the liquor-seller; then the cold did not seem so great."

At this moment our host entered with the portable furnace and boiler,
the Russian _Somovar_. I offered our guide a cup of tea. Down he came
at once. As he stood in the glare of the pine torch his appearance was
remarkable. A man about forty years of age, medium height, slight but
with broad shoulders. His black beard was turning grey; large, quick,
restless eyes, gave him an expression full of cunning, and yet not at
all disagreeable. He was dressed in wide Tartar pantaloons and an old
jacket. His hair was cut evenly round.

I offered him a cup of tea. He tasted it and made a grimace.

"Do me the favor, my lord, to order me a glass of brandy; tea is not the
Cossack's drink."

I willingly granted the request. The host took from the shelf of a
closet a bottle and a glass, and going up to him, looking him full in
the face, said:

"Ah! ah! here you are again in our district. Whence has God brought
you?"

My guide winked in the most significant fashion and replied by the
well-know proverb: "'The sparrow was in the orchard eating flax-seed;
the grandmother threw a stone at it, and missed.' And you? how are all
yours?"

"How are we?" said the host, and continuing in proverbs: "'They began to
ring the bell for Vespers, but the priest's wife forbade it. The priest
went visiting, and the devils are in the graveyard.'"

"Be silent, uncle," said the vagabond.

"'When there shall be rain, there will be mushrooms, and when there
shall be mushrooms, there will be a basket to put them in. Put thy
hatchet behind thy back, the forest guard is out walking.'"

"To your lordship's health." Taking the glass, he made the sign of the
cross, and at one gulp swallowed his brandy. He then saluted me and
remounted to his loft. I did not understand a word of this thief's
slang. It was only in the sequel that I learned that they spoke of
the affairs of the army of the Iaik, which had just been reduced to
obedience after the revolt of 1772. Saveliitch listened and glanced
suspiciously from host to guide.

The species of inn where we were sheltered was in the very heart of the
steppes, far from the road and every inhabited spot, and looked very
much like a rendezvous of robbers. But to set off again on our journey
was impossible. The disgust of Saveliitch amused not a little; however,
he finally decided to mount upon the roof of the stove, the ordinary bed
of the Russian peasant. The warm bricks of the hot-air chamber of the
stove diffused a grateful heat, and soon the old man and the host, who
had laid himself on the floor, were snoring. I stretched myself upon
a bench, and slept like a dead. Awaking next morning quite late, I saw
that the hurricane was over. The sun shone out, the snow extended in the
distance like a sheet of dazzling white damask. The horses were already
at the door, harnessed. I paid our host, who asked so small a pittance
that even Saveliitch did not, as usual, haggle over the price. His
suspicions of the evening before had entirely disappeared. I called the
guide to thank him for the service he had done us, and told Saveliitch
to give him half a rouble. Saveliitch frowned.

"Half a rouble," said he; "What for? Because you yourself deigned to
bring him to the inn? Your will be done, my lord, but we have not a
rouble to spare. If we begin by giving drink money to every one we shall
end by dying of hunger."

It was useless to argue with him; my money, according to my promise, was
entirely at his discretion. But it was very unpleasant not to be able to
reward a man who had extricated me from danger, perhaps death.

"Well," said I, coolly, "if you will not give him half a rouble, give
one of my coats--he is too thinly clad; give him the hare-skin touloup."

"Have mercy on me! My dear Peter," said Saveliitch, "what does he want
with your touloup? He will drink its price, the dog, at the first inn."

"That, my good old man, is none of your business," said the vagabond;
"his lordship following the custom of royalty to vassals, gives me a
coat from his own back, and your duty as serf is not to dispute, but to
obey."

