There was a strange difference between the behavior of the folk in the
bows and that of the rich or great people at the other end of the boat.
The young mother clasped her infant tightly to her breast every time
that a great wave threatened to engulf the fragile vessel; but she clung
to the hope that the stranger's words had set in her heart. Each time
that the eyes turned to his face she drew fresh faith at the sight, the
strong faith of a helpless woman, a mother's faith. She lived by that
divine promise, the loving words from his lips; the simple creature
waited trustingly for them to be fulfilled, and scarcely feared the
danger any longer.

The soldier, holding fast to the vessel's side, never took his eyes off
the strange visitor. He copied on his own rough and swarthy features the
imperturbability of the other's face, applying to this task the whole
strength of a will and intelligence but little corrupted in the course
of a life of mechanical and passive obedience. So emulous was he of a
calm and tranquil courage greater than his own, that at last, perhaps
unconsciously, something of that mysterious nature passed into his
own soul. His admiration became an instinctive zeal for this man, a
boundless love for and belief in him, such a love as soldiers feel for
their leader when he has the power of swaying other men, when the halo
of victories surrounds him, and the magical fascination of genius is
felt in all that he does. The poor outcast was murmuring to herself:

"Ah! miserable wretch that I am! Have I not suffered enough to expiate
the sins of my youth? Ah! wretched woman, why did you leave the gay life
of a frivolous Frenchwoman? why did you devour the goods of God with
churchmen, the substance of the poor with extortioners and fleecers of
the poor? Oh! I have sinned indeed!--Oh my God! my God! let me finish my
time in hell here in this world of misery."

And again she cried, "Holy Virgin, Mother of God, have pity upon me!"

"Be comforted, mother. God is not a Lombard usurer. I may have killed
people good and bad at random in my time, but I am not afraid of the
resurrection."

"Ah! master Lancepesade, how happy those fair ladies are, to be so near
to a bishop, a holy man! They will get absolution for their sins," said
the old woman. "Oh! if I could only hear a priest say to me, 'Thy sins
are forgiven!' I should believe it then."

The stranger turned towards her, and the goodness in his face made her
tremble.

"Have faith," he said, "and you will be saved."

"May God reward you, good sir," she answered. "If what you say is true,
I will go on pilgrimage barefooted to Our Lady of Loretto to pray to her
for you and for me."

The two peasants, father and son, were silent, patient, and submissive
to the will of God, like folk whose wont it is to fall in instinctively
with the ways of Nature like cattle. At the one end of the boat stood
riches, pride, learning, debauchery, and crime--human society, such as
art and thought and education and worldly interests and laws have made
it; and at this end there was terror and wailing, innumerable different
impulses all repressed by hideous doubts--at this end, and at this only,
the agony of fear.

Above all these human lives stood a strong man, the skipper; no doubts
assailed him, the chief, the king, the fatalist among them. He was
trusting in himself rather than in Providence, crying, "Bail away!"
instead of "Holy Virgin," defying the storm, in fact, and struggling
with the sea like a wrestler.

But the helpless poor at the other end of the wherry! The mother rocking
on her bosom the little one who smiled at the storm; the woman once
so frivolous and gay, and now tormented with bitter remorse; the old
soldier covered with scars, a mutilated life the sole reward of his
unflagging loyalty and faithfulness. This veteran could scarcely count
on the morsel of bread soaked in tears to keep the life in him, yet he
was always ready to laugh, and went his way merrily, happy when he could
drown his glory in the depths of a pot of beer, or could tell tales
of the wars to the children who admired him, leaving his future with a
light heart in the hands of God. Lastly, there were the two peasants,
used to hardships and toil, labor incarnate, the labor by which the
world lives. These simple folk were indifferent to thought and its
treasures, ready to sink them all in a belief; and their faith was but
so much the more vigorous because they had never disputed about it nor
analyzed it. Such a nature is a virgin soil, conscience has not been
tampered with, feeling is deep and strong; repentance, trouble, love,
and work have developed, purified, concentrated, and increased their
force of will a hundred times, the will--the one thing in man that
resembles what learned doctors call the Soul.

The boat, guided by the well-nigh miraculous skill of the steersman,
came almost within sight of Ostend, when, not fifty paces from the
shore, she was suddenly struck by a heavy sea and capsized. The stranger
with the light about his head spoke to this little world of drowning
creatures:

"Those who have faith shall be saved; let them follow me!"


