"What, then, do you wish to discuss with me?"

"Neither the Colonel nor yourself. Nor need I allude to the briefs which
clever advocates may draw up when armed with the curious facts of this
case, or the advantage they may derive from the letters you received
from your first husband before your marriage to your second."

"It is false," she cried, with the violence of a spoilt woman. "I never
had a letter from Comte Chabert; and if some one is pretending to be
the Colonel, it is some swindler, some returned convict, like Coignard
perhaps. It makes me shudder only to think of it. Can the Colonel rise
from the dead, monsieur? Bonaparte sent an aide-de-camp to inquire for
me on his death, and to this day I draw the pension of three thousand
francs granted to this widow by the Government. I have been perfectly in
the right to turn away all the Chaberts who have ever come, as I shall
all who may come."

"Happily we are alone, madame. We can tell lies at our ease," said he
coolly, and finding it amusing to lash up the Countess' rage so as to
lead her to betray herself, by tactics familiar to lawyers, who are
accustomed to keep cool when their opponents or their clients are in
a passion. "Well, then, we must fight it out," thought he, instantly
hitting on a plan to entrap her and show her her weakness.

"The proof that you received the first letter, madame, is that it
contained some securities--"

"Oh, as to securities--that it certainly did not."

"Then you received the letter," said Derville, smiling. "You are caught,
madame, in the first snare laid for you by an attorney, and you fancy
you could fight against Justice----"

The Countess colored, and then turned pale, hiding her face in her
hands. Then she shook off her shame, and retorted with the natural
impertinence of such women, "Since you are the so-called Chabert's
attorney, be so good as to--"

"Madame," said Derville, "I am at this moment as much your lawyer as I
am Colonel Chabert's. Do you suppose I want to lose so valuable a client
as you are?--But you are not listening."

"Nay, speak on, monsieur," said she graciously.

"Your fortune came to you from M. le Comte Chabert, and you cast him
off. Your fortune is immense, and you leave him to beg. An advocate
can be very eloquent when a cause is eloquent in itself; there are here
circumstances which might turn public opinion strongly against you."

"But, monsieur," said the Comtesse, provoked by the way in which
Derville turned and laid her on the gridiron, "even if I grant that your
M. Chabert is living, the law will uphold my second marriage on account
of the children, and I shall get off with the restitution of two hundred
and twenty-five thousand francs to M. Chabert."

"It is impossible to foresee what view the Bench may take of the
question. If on one side we have a mother and children, on the other we
have an old man crushed by sorrows, made old by your refusals to know
him. Where is he to find a wife? Can the judges contravene the law? Your
marriage with Colonel Chabert has priority on its side and every legal
right. But if you appear under disgraceful colors, you might have an
unlooked-for adversary. That, madame, is the danger against which I
would warn you."

"And who is he?"

"Comte Ferraud."

"Monsieur Ferraud has too great an affection for me, too much respect
for the mother of his children--"

"Do not talk of such absurd things," interrupted Derville, "to lawyers,
who are accustomed to read hearts to the bottom. At this instant
Monsieur Ferraud has not the slightest wish to annual your union, and I
am quite sure that he adores you; but if some one were to tell him that
his marriage is void, that his wife will be called before the bar of
public opinion as a criminal--"

"He would defend me, monsieur."

"No, madame."

"What reason could he have for deserting me, monsieur?"

"That he would be free to marry the only daughter of a peer of France,
whose title would be conferred on him by patent from the King."

The Countess turned pale.

"A hit!" said Derville to himself. "I have you on the hip; the poor
Colonel's case is won."--"Besides, madame," he went on aloud, "he would
feel all the less remorse because a man covered with glory--a
General, Count, Grand Cross of the Legion of Honor--is not such a bad
alternative; and if that man insisted on his wife's returning to him--"

"Enough, enough, monsieur!" she exclaimed. "I will never have any lawyer
but you. What is to be done?"

"Compromise!" said Derville.

"Does he still love me?" she said.

"Well, I do not think he can do otherwise."

The Countess raised her head at these words. A flash of hope shone in
her eyes; she thought perhaps that she could speculate on her first
husband's affection to gain her cause by some feminine cunning.

"I shall await your orders, madame, to know whether I am to report our
proceedings to you, or if you will come to my office to agree to the
terms of a compromise," said Derville, taking leave.



A week after Derville had paid these two visits, on a fine morning
in June, the husband and wife, who had been separated by an almost
supernatural chance, started from the opposite ends of Paris to meet in
the office of the lawyer who was engaged by both. The supplies liberally
advanced by Derville to Colonel Chabert had enabled him to dress as
suited his position in life, and the dead man arrived in a very decent
cab. He wore a wig suited to his face, was dressed in blue cloth with
white linen, and wore under his waistcoat the broad red ribbon of the
higher grade of the Legion of Honor. In resuming the habits of wealth he
had recovered his soldierly style. He held himself up; his face, grave
and mysterious-looking, reflected his happiness and all his hopes, and
seemed to have acquired youth and _impasto_, to borrow a picturesque
word from the painter's art. He was no more like the Chabert of the old
box-coat than a cartwheel double sou is like a newly coined forty-franc
piece. The passer-by, only to see him, would have recognized at once one
of the noble wrecks of our old army, one of the heroic men on whom
our national glory is reflected, as a splinter of ice on which the sun
shines seems to reflect every beam. These veterans are at once a picture
and a book.


