"Boutin set out. He was a lucky fellow! He had two bears, admirably
trained, which brought him in a living. I could not go with him; the
pain I suffered forbade my walking long stages. I wept, monsieur, when
we parted, after I had gone as far as my state allowed in company with
him and his bears. At Carlsruhe I had an attack of neuralgia in the
head, and lay for six weeks on straw in an inn. I should never have
ended if I were to tell you all the distresses of my life as a beggar.
Moral suffering, before which physical suffering pales, nevertheless
excites less pity, because it is not seen. I remember shedding tears, as
I stood in front of a fine house in Strassburg where once I had given
an entertainment, and where nothing was given me, not even a piece of
bread. Having agreed with Boutin on the road I was to take, I went to
every post-office to ask if there were a letter or some money for me.
I arrived at Paris without having found either. What despair I had been
forced to endure! 'Boutin must be dead! I told myself, and in fact the
poor fellow was killed at Waterloo. I heard of his death later, and by
mere chance. His errand to my wife had, of course, been fruitless.

"At last I entered Paris--with the Cossacks. To me this was grief on
grief. On seeing the Russians in France, I quite forgot that I had no
shoes on my feet nor money in my pocket. Yes, monsieur, my clothes were
in tatters. The evening before I reached Paris I was obliged to bivouac
in the woods of Claye. The chill of the night air no doubt brought on an
attack of some nameless complaint which seized me as I was crossing
the Faubourg Saint-Martin. I dropped almost senseless at the door of an
ironmonger's shop. When I recovered I was in a bed in the Hotel-Dieu.
There I stayed very contentedly for about a month. I was then turned
out; I had no money, but I was well, and my feet were on the good stones
of Paris. With what delight and haste did I make my way to the Rue du
Mont-Blanc, where my wife should be living in a house belonging to me!
Bah! the Rue du Mont-Blanc was now the Rue de la Chausee d'Antin; I
could not find my house; it had been sold and pulled down. Speculators
had built several houses over my gardens. Not knowing that my wife had
married M. Ferraud, I could obtain no information.

"At last I went to the house of an old lawyer who had been in charge of
my affairs. This worthy man was dead, after selling his connection to
a younger man. This gentleman informed me, to my great surprise, of the
administration of my estate, the settlement of the moneys, of my wife's
marriage, and the birth of her two children. When I told him that I was
Colonel Chabert, he laughed so heartily that I left him without saying
another word. My detention at Stuttgart had suggested possibilities of
Charenton, and I determined to act with caution. Then, monsieur,
knowing where my wife lived, I went to her house, my heart high with
hope.--Well," said the Colonel, with a gesture of concentrated fury,
"when I called under an assumed name I was not admitted, and on the day
when I used my own I was turned out of doors.

"To see the Countess come home from a ball or the play in the early
morning, I have sat whole nights through, crouching close to the wall of
her gateway. My eyes pierced the depths of the carriage, which flashed
past me with the swiftness of lightning, and I caught a glimpse of the
woman who is my wife and no longer mine. Oh, from that day I have
lived for vengeance!" cried the old man in a hollow voice, and suddenly
standing up in front of Derville. "She knows that I am alive; since my
return she has had two letters written with my own hand. She loves me
no more!--I--I know not whether I love or hate her. I long for her and
curse her by turns. To me she owes all her fortune, all her happiness;
well, she has not sent me the very smallest pittance. Sometimes I do not
know what will become of me!"

With these words the veteran dropped on to his chair again and remained
motionless. Derville sat in silence, studying his client.

"It is a serious business," he said at length, mechanically. "Even
granting the genuineness of the documents to be procured from Heilsberg,
it is not proved to me that we can at once win our case. It must go
before three tribunals in succession. I must think such a matter over
with a clear head; it is quite exceptional."

"Oh," said the Colonel, coldly, with a haughty jerk of his head, "if I
fail, I can die--but not alone."

The feeble old man had vanished. The eyes were those of a man of energy,
lighted up with the spark of desire and revenge.

"We must perhaps compromise," said the lawyer.

"Compromise!" echoed Colonel Chabert. "Am I dead, or am I alive?"

"I hope, monsieur," the attorney went on, "that you will follow my
advice. Your cause is mine. You will soon perceive the interest I take
in your situation, almost unexampled in judicial records. For the moment
I will give you a letter to my notary, who will pay to your order fifty
francs every ten days. It would be unbecoming for you to come here to
receive alms. If you are Colonel Chabert, you ought to be at no man's
mercy. I shall record these advances as a loan; you have estates to
recover; you are rich."

This delicate compassion brought tears to the old man's eyes. Derville
rose hastily, for it was perhaps not correct for a lawyer to show
emotion; he went into the adjoining room, and came back with an unsealed
letter, which he gave to the Colonel. When the poor man held it in his
hand, he felt through the paper two gold pieces.

"Will you be good enough to describe the documents, and tell me the name
of the town, and in what kingdom?" said the lawyer.

The Colonel dictated the information, and verified the spelling of the
names of places; then he took his hat in one hand, looked at Derville,
and held out the other--a horny hand, saying with much simplicity:

"On my honor, sir, after the Emperor, you are the man to whom I shall
owe most. You are a splendid fellow!"

The attorney clapped his hand into the Colonel's, saw him to the stairs,
and held a light for him.

"Boucard," said Derville to his head clerk, "I have just listened to a
tale that may cost me five and twenty louis. If I am robbed, I shall not
regret the money, for I shall have seen the most consummate actor of the
day."

When the Colonel was in the street and close to a lamp, he took the two
twenty-franc pieces out of the letter and looked at them for a moment
under the light. It was the first gold he had seen for nine years.

"I may smoke cigars!" he said to himself.



