The best man-doctor in the place wrote a prescription, and the
veterinary Deputy Inspector-General went over it afterwards to be sure
that the drugs were in the proper dog-proportions; and that was the
first time in his life that our doctor ever allowed his prescriptions
to be edited. It was a strong tonic, and it put the dear boy on his feet
for a week or two; then he lost flesh again. I asked a man I knew to
take him up to the Hills with him when he went, and the man came to the
door with his kit packed on the top of the carriage. Garin took in the
situation at one red glance. The hair rose along his back; he sat down
in front of me and delivered the most awful growl I have ever heard in
the jaws of a dog. I shouted to my friend to get away at once, and as
soon as the carriage was out of the garden Garin laid his head on my
knee and whined. So I knew his answer, and devoted myself to getting
Stanley's address in the Hills.

My turn to go to the cool came late in August. We were allowed thirty
days' holiday in a year, if no one fell sick, and we took it as we could
be spared. My chief and Bob the Librarian had their holiday first, and
when they were gone I made a calendar, as I always did, and hung it up
at the head of my cot, tearing off one day at a time till they returned.
Vixen had gone up to the Hills with me five times before; and she
appreciated the cold and the damp and the beautiful wood fires there as
much as I did.

"Garm," I said, "we are going back to Stanley at Kasauli.
Kasauli--Stanley; Stanley Kasauli." And I repeated it twenty times.
It was not Kasauli really, but another place. Still I remembered what
Stanley had said in my garden on the last night, and I dared not change
the name. Then Garm began to tremble; then he barked; and then he leaped
up at me, frisking and wagging his tail.

"Not now," I said, holding up my hand. "When I say 'Go,' we'll go,
Garm." I pulled out the little blanket coat and spiked collar that Vixen
always wore up in the Hills to protect her against sudden chills and
thieving leopards, and I let the two smell them and talk it over. What
they said of course I do not know; but it made a new dog of Garm. His
eyes were bright; and he barked joyfully when I spoke to him. He ate his
food, and he killed his rats for the next three weeks, and when he began
to whine I had only to say "Stanley--Kasauli; Kasauli--Stanley," to wake
him up. I wish I had thought of it before.

My chief came back, all brown with living in the open air, and very
angry at finding it so hot in the plains. That same afternoon we three
and Kadir Buksh began to pack for our month's holiday, Vixen rolling in
and out of the bullock-trunk twenty times a minute, and Garm grinning
all over and thumping on the floor with his tail. Vixen knew the routine
of travelling as well as she knew my office-work. She went to the
station, singing songs, on the front seat of the carriage, while Garin
sat with me. She hurried into the railway carriage, saw Kadir Buksh make
up my bed for the night, got her drink of water, and curled up with her
black-patch eye on the tumult of the platform. Garin followed her (the
crowd gave him a lane all to himself) and sat down on the pillows with
his eyes blazing, and his tail a haze behind him.

We came to Umballa in the hot misty dawn, four or five men, who had been
working hard fox eleven months, shouting for our dales--the two-horse
travelling carriages that were to take us up to Kalka at the foot of the
Hills. It was all new to Garm. He did not understand carriages where you
lay at full length on your bedding, but Vixen knew and hopped into her
place at once; Garin following. The Kalka Road, before the railway was
built, was about forty-seven miles long, and the horses were changed
every eight miles. Most of them jibbed, and kicked, and plunged, but
they had to go, and they went rather better than usual for Garm's deep
bay in their rear.

There was a river to be forded, and four bullocks pulled the carriage,
and Vixen stuck her head out of the sliding-door and nearly fell into
the water while she gave directions. Garin was silent and curious,
and rather needed reassuring about Stanley and Kasauli. So we rolled,
barking and yelping, into Kalka for lunch, and Garm ate enough for two.

After Kalka the road wound among the hills, and we took a curricle with
half-broken ponies, which were changed every six miles. No one dreamed
of a railroad to Simla in those days, for it was seven thousand feet up
in the air. The road was more than fifty miles long, and the regulation
pace was just as fast as the ponies could go. Here, again, Vixen led
Garm from one carriage to the other; jumped into the back seat, and
shouted. A cool breath from the snows met us about five miles out of
Kalka, and she whined for her coat, wisely fearing a chill on the
liver. I had had one made for Garm too, and, as we climbed to the fresh
breezes, I put it on, and arm chewed it uncomprehendingly, but I think
he was grateful.

"Hi-yi-yi-yi!" sang Vixen as we shot round the curves; "Toot-toot-toot!"
went the driver's bugle at the dangerous places, and "yow! yow!" bayed
Garm. Kadir Buksh sat on the front seat and smiled. Even he was glad to
get away from the heat of the Plains that stewed in the haze behind us.
Now and then we would meet a man we knew going down to his work again,
and he would say: "What's it like below?" and I would shout: "Hotter
than cinders. What's it like up above?" and he would shout back: "Just
perfect!" and away we would go.

Suddenly Kadir Buksh said, over his shoulder: "Here is Solon"; and Garm
snored where he lay with his head on my knee. Solon is an unpleasant
little cantonment, but it has the advantage of being cool and healthy.
It is all bare and windy, and one generally stops at a rest-house nearby
for something to eat. I got out and took both dogs with me, while Kadir
Buksh made tea. A soldier told, us we should find Stanley "out there,"
nodding his head towards a bare, bleak hill.

When we climbed to the top we spied that very Stanley, who had given me
all this trouble, sitting on a rock with his face in his hands, and his
overcoat hanging loose about him. I never saw anything so lonely and
dejected in my life as this one little man, crumpled up and thinking, on
the great gray hillside.

Here Garm left me.

He departed without a word, and, so far as I could see, without moving
his legs. He flew through the air bodily, and I heard the whack of him
as he flung himself at Stanley, knocking the little man clean over. They
rolled on the ground together, shouting, and yelping, and hugging. I
could not see which was dog and which was man, till Stanley got up and
whimpered.

He told me that he had been suffering from fever at intervals, and was
very weak. He looked all he said, but even while I watched, both man and
dog plumped out to their natural sizes, precisely as dried apples swell
in water. Garin was on his shoulder, and his breast and feet all at the
same time, so that Stanley spoke all through a cloud of Garin--gulping,
sobbing, slavering Garm. He did not say anything that I could
understand, except that he had fancied he was going to die, but that now
he was quite well, and that he was not going to give up Garin any more
to anybody under the rank of Beelzebub.

Then he said he felt hungry, and thirsty, and happy.

We went down to tea at the rest-house, where Stanley stuffed himself
with sardines and raspberry jam, and beer, and cold mutton and pickles,
when Garm wasn't climbing over him; and then Vixen and I went on.

Garm saw how it was at once. He said good-bye to me three times, giving
me both paws one after another, and leaping on to my shoulder. He
further escorted us, singing Hosannas at the top of his voice, a mile
down the road. Then he raced back to his own master.

Vixen never opened her mouth, but when the cold twilight came, and we
could see the lights of Simla across the hills, she snuffled with her
nose at the breast of my ulster. I unbuttoned it, and tucked her inside.
Then she gave a contented little sniff, and fell fast asleep, her head
on my breast, till we bundled out at Simla, two of the four happiest
people in all the world that night.



