"There are certainly some points of interest in this case, Watson," he
remarked when the landlady had left us.  "It may, of course, be
trivial--individual eccentricity; or it may be very much deeper than
appears on the surface.  The first thing that strike one is the obvious
possibility that the person now in the rooms may be entirely different
from the one who engaged them."

"Why should you think so?"

"Well, apart from this cigarette-end, was it not suggestive that the
only time the lodger went out was immediately after his taking the
rooms?  He came back--or someone came back--when all witnesses were out
of the way.  We have no proof that the person who came back was the
person who went out.  Then, again, the man who took the rooms spoke
English well.  This other, however, prints 'match' when it should have
been 'matches.'  I can imagine that the word was taken out of a
dictionary, which would give the noun but not the plural.  The laconic
style may be to conceal the absence of knowledge of English.  Yes,
Watson, there are good reasons to suspect that there has been a
substitution of lodgers."

"But for what possible end?"

"Ah! there lies our problem.  There is one rather obvious line of
investigation."  He took down the great book in which, day by day, he
filed the agony columns of the various London journals. "Dear me!" said
he, turning over the pages, "what a chorus of groans, cries, and
bleatings!  What a rag-bag of singular happenings!  But surely the most
valuable hunting-ground that ever was given to a student of the
unusual!  This person is alone and cannot be approached by letter
without a breach of that absolute secrecy which is desired.  How is any
news or any message to reach him from without?  Obviously by
advertisement through a newspaper.  There seems no other way, and
fortunately we need concern ourselves with the one paper only.  Here
are the Daily Gazette extracts of the last fortnight.  'Lady with a
black boa at Prince's Skating Club'--that we may pass.  'Surely Jimmy
will not break his mother's heart'--that appears to be irrelevant.  'If
the lady who fainted on Brixton bus'--she does not interest me.  'Every
day my heart longs--' Bleat, Watson--unmitigated bleat!  Ah, this is a
little more possible.  Listen to this:  'Be patient.  Will find some
sure means of communications.  Meanwhile, this column.  G.'  That is
two days after Mrs. Warren's lodger arrived.  It sounds plausible, does
it not?  The mysterious one could understand English, even if he could
not print it.  Let us see if we can pick up the trace again.  Yes, here
we are--three days later.  'Am making successful arrangements.
Patience and prudence.  The clouds will pass.  G.'  Nothing for a week
after that.  Then comes something much more definite:  'The path is
clearing.  If I find chance signal message remember code agreed--One A,
two B, and so on. You will hear soon.  G.'  That was in yesterday's
paper, and there is nothing in to-day's. It's all very appropriate to
Mrs. Warren's lodger.  If we wait a little, Watson, I don't doubt that
the affair will grow more intelligible."

So it proved; for in the morning I found my friend standing on the
hearthrug with his back to the fire and a smile of complete
satisfaction upon his face.

"How's this, Watson?" he cried, picking up the paper from the table.
"'High red house with white stone facings.  Third floor. Second window
left.  After dusk.  G.'  That is definite enough. I think after
breakfast we must make a little reconnaissance of Mrs. Warren's
neighbourhood.  Ah, Mrs. Warren! what news do you bring us this
morning?"

Our client had suddenly burst into the room with an explosive energy
which told of some new and momentous development.

"It's a police matter, Mr. Holmes!" she cried.  "I'll have no more of
it!  He shall pack out of there with his baggage.  I would have gone
straight up and told him so, only I thought it was but fair to you to
take your opinion first.  But I'm at the end of my patience, and when
it comes to knocking my old man about--"

"Knocking Mr. Warren about?"

"Using him roughly, anyway."

"But who used him roughly?"

"Ah! that's what we want to know!  It was this morning, sir.  Mr.
Warren is a timekeeper at Morton and Waylight's, in Tottenham Court
Road.  He has to be out of the house before seven. Well, this morning
he had not gone ten paces down the road when two men came up behind
him, threw a coat over his head, and bundled him into a cab that was
beside the curb.  They drove him an hour, and then opened the door and
shot him out.  He lay in the roadway so shaken in his wits that he
never saw what became of the cab. When he picked himself up he found he
was on Hampstead Heath; so he took a bus home, and there he lies now on
his sofa, while I came straight round to tell you what had happened."

"Most interesting," said Holmes.  "Did he observe the appearance of
these men--did he hear them talk?"

"No; he is clean dazed.  He just knows that he was lifted up as if by
magic and dropped as if by magic. Two a least were in it, and maybe
three."

"And you connect this attack with your lodger?"

"Well, we've lived there fifteen years and no such happenings ever came
before.  I've had enough of him.  Money's not everything. I'll have him
out of my house before the day is done."

"Wait a bit, Mrs. Warren.  Do nothing rash. I begin to think that this
affair may be very much more important than appeared at first sight.
It is clear now that some danger is threatening your lodger.  It is
equally clear that his enemies, lying in wait for him near your door,
mistook your husband for him in the foggy morning light.  On
discovering their mistake they released him. What they would have done
had it not been a mistake, we can only conjecture."

"Well, what am I to do, Mr. Holmes?"

"I have a great fancy to see this lodger of yours, Mrs. Warren."

"I don't see how that is to be managed, unless you break in the door.
I always hear him unlock it as I go down the stair after I leave the
tray."

"He has to take the tray in.  Surely we could conceal ourselves and see
him do it."

The landlady thought for a moment.

"Well, sir, there's the box-room opposite.  I could arrange a
looking-glass, maybe, and if you were behind the door--"

"Excellent!" said Holmes.  "When does he lunch?"

"About one, sir."


