The Londoner nodded.

"The note is written upon ordinary cream-laid paper without watermark.
It is a quarter-sheet.  The paper is cut off in two snips with a
short-bladed scissors.  It has been folded over three times and sealed
with purple wax, put on hurriedly and pressed down with some flat oval
object.  It is addressed to Mr. Garcia, Wisteria Lodge. It says:

"Our own colours, green and white.  Green open, white shut.  Main
stair, first corridor, seventh right, green baize.  Godspeed.  D.

"It is a woman's writing, done with a sharp-pointed pen, but the
address is either done with another pen or by someone else.  It is
thicker and bolder, as you see."

"A very remarkable note," said Holmes, glancing it over.  "I must
compliment you, Mr. Baynes, upon your attention to detail in your
examination of it.  A few trifling points might perhaps be added. The
oval seal is undoubtedly a plain sleeve-link--what else is of such a
shape?  The scissors were bent nail scissors.  Short as the two snips
are, you can distinctly see the same slight curve in each."

The country detective chuckled.

"I thought I had squeezed all the juice out of it, but I see there was
a little over," he said.  "I'm bound to say that I make nothing of the
note except that there was something on hand, and that a woman, as
usual was at the bottom of it."

Mr. Scott Eccles had fidgeted in his seat during this conversation.

"I am glad you found the note, since it corroborates my story," said
he.  "But I beg to point out that I have not yet heard what has
happened to Mr. Garcia, nor what has become of his household."

"As to Garcia," said Gregson, "that is easily answered.  He was found
dead this morning upon Oxshott Common, nearly a mile from his home.
His head had been smashed to pulp by heavy blows of a sandbag or some
such instrument, which had crushed rather than wounded.  It is a lonely
corner, and there is no house within a quarter of a mile of the spot.
He had apparently been struck down first from behind, but his assailant
had gone on beating him long after he was dead.  It was a most furious
assault.  There are no footsteps nor any clue to the criminals."

"Robbed?"

"No, there was no attempt at robbery."

"This is very painful--very painful and terrible," said Mr. Scott
Eccles in a querulous voice, "but it is really uncommonly hard on me.
I had nothing to do with my host going off upon a nocturnal excursion
and meeting so sad an end.  How do I come to be mixed up with the case?"

"Very simply, sir," Inspector Baynes answered.  "The only document
found in the pocket of the deceased was a letter from you saying that
you would be with him on the night of his death. It was the envelope of
this letter which gave us the dead man's name and address.  It was
after nine this morning when we reached his house and found neither you
nor anyone else inside it.  I wired to Mr. Gregson to run you down in
London while I examined Wisteria Lodge.  Then I came into town, joined
Mr. Gregson, and here we are."

"I think now," said Gregson, rising, "we had best put this matter into
an official shape.  You will come round with us to the station, Mr.
Scott Eccles, and let us have your statement in writing."

"Certainly, I will come at once.  But I retain your services, Mr.
Holmes.  I desire you to spare no expense and no pains to get at the
truth."

My friend turned to the country inspector.

"I suppose that you have no objection to my collaborating with you, Mr.
Baynes?"

"Highly honoured, sir, I am sure."


