The door of the empty house in which Shatov was lodging was not closed;
but, making his way into the passage, Stavrogin found himself in utter
darkness, and began feeling with his hand for the stairs to the upper
story. Suddenly a door opened upstairs and a light appeared. Shatov
did not come out himself, but simply opened his door. When Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch was standing in the doorway of the room, he saw Shatov
standing at the table in the corner, waiting expectantly.

"Will you receive me on business?" he queried from the doorway.

"Come in and sit down," answered Shatov. "Shut the door; stay, I'll shut
it."

He locked the door, returned to the table, and sat down, facing Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch. He had grown thinner during that week, and now he
seemed in a fever.

"You've been worrying me to death," he said, looking down, in a soft
half-whisper. "Why didn't you come?"

"You were so sure I should come then?"

"Yes, stay, I have been delirious... perhaps I'm delirious now.... Stay
a moment."

He got up and seized something that was lying on the uppermost of his
three bookshelves. It was a revolver.

"One night, in delirium, I fancied that you were coming to kill me, and
early next morning I spent my last farthing on buying a revolver from
that good-for-nothing fellow Lyamshin; I did not mean to let you do it.
Then I came to myself again... I've neither powder nor shot; it has been
lying there on the shelf till now; wait a minute...."

He got up and was opening the casement.

"Don't throw it away, why should you?" Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch checked
him. "It's worth something. Besides, tomorrow people will begin saying
that there are revolvers lying about under Shatov's window. Put it back,
that's right; sit down. Tell me, why do you seem to be penitent for
having thought I should come to kill you? I have not come now to be
reconciled, but to talk of something necessary. Enlighten me to begin
with. You didn't give me that blow because of my connection with your
wife?"

"You know I didn't, yourself," said Shatov, looking down again.

"And not because you believed the stupid gossip about Darya Pavlovna?"

"No, no, of course not! It's nonsense! My sister told me from the very
first..." Shatov said, harshly and impatiently, and even with a slight
stamp of his foot.

"Then I guessed right and you too guessed right," Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch went on in a tranquil voice. "You are right. Marya
Timofyevna Lebyadkin is my lawful wife, married to me four and a half
years ago in Petersburg. I suppose the blow was on her account?"

Shatov, utterly astounded, listened in silence.

"I guessed, but did not believe it," he muttered at last, looking
strangely at Stavrogin.

"And you struck me?"

Shatov flushed and muttered almost incoherently:

"Because of your fall... your lie. I didn't go up to you to punish
you... I didn't know when I went up to you that I should strike you... I
did it because you meant so much to me in my life... I..."

"I understand, I understand, spare your words. I am sorry you are
feverish. I've come about a most urgent matter."

"I have been expecting you too long." Shatov seemed to be quivering all
over, and he got up from his seat. "Say what you have to say... I'll
speak too... later."

He sat down.

"What I have come about is nothing of that kind," began Nikolay
Vsyevolodovitch, scrutinising him with curiosity. "Owing to certain
circumstances I was forced this very day to choose such an hour to come
and tell you that they may murder you."

Shatov looked wildly at him.

"I know that I may be in some danger," he said in measured tones, "but
how can you have come to know of it?"

"Because I belong to them as you do, and am a member of their society,
just as you are."

"You... you are a member of the society?"

"I see from your eyes that you were prepared for anything from me rather
than that," said Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch, with a faint smile. "But,
excuse me, you knew then that there would be an attempt on your life?"

"Nothing of the sort. And I don't think so now, in spite of your words,
though... though there's no being sure of anything with these fools!"
he cried suddenly in a fury, striking the table with his fist. "I'm not
afraid of them! I've broken with them. That fellow's run here four times
to tell me it was possible... but"--he looked at Stavrogin--"what do
you know about it, exactly?"

"Don't be uneasy; I am not deceiving you," Nikolay Vsyevolodovitch went
on, rather coldly, with the air of a man who is only fulfilling a duty.
"You question me as to what I know. I know that you entered that society
abroad, two years ago, at the time of the old organisation, just before
you went to America, and I believe, just after our last conversation,
about which you wrote so much to me in your letter from America. By
the way, I must apologise for not having answered you by letter, but
confined myself to..."

"To sending the money; wait a bit," Shatov interrupted, hurriedly
pulling out a drawer in the table and taking from under some papers a
rainbow-coloured note. "Here, take it, the hundred roubles you sent me;
but for you I should have perished out there. I should have been a long
time paying it back if it had not been for your mother. She made me a
present of that note nine months ago, because I was so badly off after
my illness. But, go on, please...."

He was breathless.


