It is evident from what has been said, that there are as many different
sorts of democracies and oligarchies as I have reckoned up: for, of
necessity, either all ranks of the people which I have enumerated must
have a share in the government, or some only, and others not; for when
the husbandmen, and those only who possess moderate fortunes, have the
supreme power, they will govern according to law; for as they must get
their livings by their employs, they have but little leisure for public
business: they will therefore establish proper laws, and never call
public assemblies but when there is a necessity for them; and they will
readily let every one partake with them in the administration of public
affairs as soon as they possess that fortune which the law requires for
their qualification: every one, therefore, who is qualified will have
his share in the government: for to exclude any would be to make the
government an oligarchy, and for all to have leisure to attend
without they had a subsistence would be impossible: for these reasons,
therefore, this government is a species of democracy. Another species is
distinguished by the mode of electing their magistrates, in which every
one is eligible, to whose birth there are no objections, provided he is
supposed to have leisure to attend: for which reason in such a democracy
the supreme power will be vested in the laws, as there will be nothing
paid to those who go to the public assemblies. A third species is where
every freeman has a right to a share in the government, which he will
not accept for the cause already assigned; for which reason here also
the supreme power will be in the law. The fourth species [1293a] of
democracy, the last which was established in order of time, arose when
cities were greatly enlarged to what they were at first, and when the
public revenue became something considerable; for then the populace, on
account of their numbers, were admitted to share in the management of
public affairs, for then even the poorest people were at leisure to
attend to them, as they received wages for so doing; nay, they were more
so than others, as they were not hindered by having anything of their
own to mind, as the rich had; for which reason these last very often did
not frequent the public assemblies and the courts of justice: thus the
supreme power was lodged in the poor, and not in the laws. These are
the different sorts of democracies, and such are the causes which
necessarily gave birth to them.

The first species of oligarchy is, when the generality of the state are
men of moderate and not too large property; for this gives them leisure
for the management of public affairs: and, as they are a numerous body,
it necessarily follows that the supreme power must be in the laws, and
not in men; for as they are far removed from a monarchical government,
and have not sufficient fortune to neglect their private affairs, while
they are too many to be supported by the public, they will of course
determine to be governed by the laws, and not by each other. But if the
men of property in the state are but few, and their property is large,
then an oligarchy of the second sort will take place; for those who have
most power will think that they have a right to lord it over the others;
and, to accomplish this, they will associate to themselves some who have
an inclination for public affairs, and as they are not powerful enough
to govern without law, they will make a law for that purpose. And if
those few who have large fortunes should acquire still greater power,
the oligarchy will then alter into one of the third sort; for they will
get all the offices of the state into their own hands by a law which
directs the son to succeed upon the death of his father; and,
after that, when, by means of their increasing wealth and powerful
connections, they extend still further their oppression, a monarchical
dynasty will directly succeed wherein men will be supreme, and not the
law; and this is the fourth species of an oligarchy correspondent to the
last-mentioned class of democracies.



