If the woman abounds with blood, to bleed her a little more may not be
improper, for thereby she will both breathe the better, and have her
breasts more at liberty, and likewise more strength to bear down her
pains; and this may be done without danger because the child being about
ready to be born, has no more need of the mother's blood for its
nourishment; besides, this evacuation does many times prevent her having
a fever after delivery. Also, before her delivery, if her strength will
permit, let her walk up and down her chamber; and that she may have
strength so to do, it will be necessary to give her good strengthening
things, such as jelly, broth, new laid eggs, or some spoonfuls of burnt
wine; and let her by all means hold out her pains, bearing them down as
much as she can, at the time when they take her; and let the midwife
from time to time touch the inward orifice with her finger, to know
whether the waters are ready to break and whether the birth will follow
soon after. Let her also anoint the woman's privities with emollient
oil, hog's grease, and fresh butter, if she find they are hard to be
dilated. Let the midwife, likewise, all the time be near the labouring
woman, and diligently observe her gestures, complaints, and pains, for
by this she may guess pretty well how far her labour advanceth, because
when she changeth her ordinary groans into loud cries, it is a sign that
the child is near the birth; for at the time her pains are greater and
more frequent. Let the woman likewise, by intervals, rest herself upon
the bed to regain her strength, but not too long, especially if she be
little, short and thick, for such women have always worse labour if they
lie long on their beds in their travail. It is better, therefore, that
she walk about her chamber as long as she can, the woman supporting her
under the arms, if it be necessary; for by this means, the weight of the
child causes the inward orifices of the womb to dilate the sooner than
in bed, and if her pains be stronger and more frequent, her labour will
not be near so long. Let not the labouring woman be concerned at those
qualms and vomitings which, perhaps, she may find come upon her, for
they will be much for her advantage in the issue, however uneasy she may
be for a time, as they further her pains and throes by provoking
downward.

When the waters of the child are ready and gathered (which may be
perceived through the membranes presenting themselves to the orifice)
to the bigness of the whole dilatation, the midwife ought to let them
break of themselves, and not, like some hasty midwives, who being
impatient of the woman's long labour, break them, intending thereby to
hasten their business, when instead thereof, they retard it; for by the
too hasty breaking of these waters (which nature designed to make the
child slip more easy), the passage remains dry by which means the pains
and throes of the labouring woman are less efficacious to bring forth
the infant than they would otherwise have been. It is, therefore, much
the better way to let the waters break of themselves; after which the
midwife may with ease feel the child by that part which first presents,
and thereby discern whether it comes right, that is, with the head
foremost, for that is the proper and most natural way of the birth. If
the head comes right, she will find it big, round, hard and equal; but
if it be any other part, she will find it rugged, unequal, soft and
hard, according to the nature of the part it is. And this being the true
time when a woman ought to be delivered, if nature be not wanting to
perform its office, therefore, when the midwife finds the birth thus
coming forward let her hasten to assist and deliver it, for it
ordinarily happens soon after, if it be natural.

But if it happens, as it sometimes may, that the waters break away too
long before the birth, in such a case, those things which hasten nature
may safely be administered. For which purpose make use of pennyroyal,
dittany, juniper berries, red coral, betony and feverfew, boiled in
white wine, and give a drachm of it, or it would be much better to take
the juice of it when it is in its prime, which is in May, and having
clarified it, make it into a syrup with double its weight of sugar, and
keep it all the year, to use when occasion calls for it; mugwort used in
the same manner is also good in this case; also a drachm of cinnamon
powder given inwardly profits much in this case; and so does tansey
broiled and applied to the privities; or an oil of it, so, made and
used, as you were taught before. The stone _aetites_ held to the
privities, is of extraordinary virtue, and instantly draws away, both
child and after-burden; but great care must be taken to remove it
presently, or it will draw forth womb and all; for such is the magnetic
virtue of this stone that both child and womb follow it as readily as
iron doth the load-stone or the load-stone the north star.

There are many things that physicians affirm are good in this case;
among which are an ass's or horse's hoof, hung near the privities; a
piece of red coral hung near the said place. A load-stone helps very
much, held in the woman's left hand; or the skin cut off a snake, girt
about the middle, next to the skin. These things are mentioned by
Mizaldus, but setting those things aside, as not so certain,
notwithstanding Mizaldus quotes them, the following prescriptions are
very good to speedy deliverance to women in travail.


