I don’t know how he meant it, but at that moment, slim and elegant, he
seemed a mere bundle of nerves himself, with the flitting expressions on
his thin, well-bred face, with the restlessness of his meagre brown hands
amongst the objects on the table.  With some pipe ash amongst a little
spilt wine his forefinger traced a capital R.  Then he looked into an
empty glass profoundly.  I have a notion that I sat there staring and
listening like a yokel at a play.  Mills’ pipe was lying quite a foot
away in front of him, empty, cold.  Perhaps he had no more tobacco.  Mr.
Blunt assumed his dandified air—nervously.

“Of course her movements are commented on in the most exclusive
drawing-rooms and also in other places, also exclusive, but where the
gossip takes on another tone.  There they are probably saying that she
has got a ‘_coup de coeur_’ for some one.  Whereas I think she is utterly
incapable of that sort of thing.  That Venetian affair, the beginning of
it and the end of it, was nothing but a _coup de tête_, and all those
activities in which I am involved, as you see (by order of Headquarters,
ha, ha, ha!), are nothing but that, all this connection, all this
intimacy into which I have dropped . . . Not to speak of my mother, who
is delightful, but as irresponsible as one of those crazy princesses that
shock their Royal families. . . ”

He seemed to bite his tongue and I observed that Mills’ eyes seemed to
have grown wider than I had ever seen them before.  In that tranquil face
it was a great play of feature.  “An intimacy,” began Mr. Blunt, with an
extremely refined grimness of tone, “an intimacy with the heiress of Mr.
Allègre on the part of . . . on my part, well, it isn’t exactly . . .
it’s open . . . well, I leave it to you, what does it look like?”

“Is there anybody looking on?” Mills let fall, gently, through his kindly
lips.

“Not actually, perhaps, at this moment.  But I don’t need to tell a man
of the world, like you, that such things cannot remain unseen.  And that
they are, well, compromising, because of the mere fact of the fortune.”

Mills got on his feet, looked for his jacket and after getting into it
made himself heard while he looked for his hat.

“Whereas the woman herself is, so to speak, priceless.”

Mr. Blunt muttered the word “Obviously.”

By then we were all on our feet.  The iron stove glowed no longer and the
lamp, surrounded by empty bottles and empty glasses, had grown dimmer.

I know that I had a great shiver on getting away from the cushions of the
divan.

“We will meet again in a few hours,” said Mr. Blunt.

“Don’t forget to come,” he said, addressing me.  “Oh, yes, do.  Have no
scruples.  I am authorized to make invitations.”

He must have noticed my shyness, my surprise, my embarrassment.  And
indeed I didn’t know what to say.

“I assure you there isn’t anything incorrect in your coming,” he
insisted, with the greatest civility.  “You will be introduced by two
good friends, Mills and myself.  Surely you are not afraid of a very
charming woman. . . .”

I was not afraid, but my head swam a little and I only looked at him
mutely.

“Lunch precisely at midday.  Mills will bring you along.  I am sorry you
two are going.  I shall throw myself on the bed for an hour or two, but I
am sure I won’t sleep.”

He accompanied us along the passage into the black-and-white hall, where
the low gas flame glimmered forlornly.  When he opened the front door the
cold blast of the mistral rushing down the street of the Consuls made me
shiver to the very marrow of my bones.

Mills and I exchanged but a few words as we walked down towards the
centre of the town.  In the chill tempestuous dawn he strolled along
musingly, disregarding the discomfort of the cold, the depressing
influence of the hour, the desolation of the empty streets in which the
dry dust rose in whirls in front of us, behind us, flew upon us from the
side streets.  The masks had gone home and our footsteps echoed on the
flagstones with unequal sound as of men without purpose, without hope.

“I suppose you will come,” said Mills suddenly.

“I really don’t know,” I said.

“Don’t you?  Well, remember I am not trying to persuade you; but I am
staying at the Hôtel de Louvre and I shall leave there at a quarter to
twelve for that lunch.  At a quarter to twelve, not a minute later.  I
suppose you can sleep?”

I laughed.

“Charming age, yours,” said Mills, as we came out on the quays.  Already
dim figures of the workers moved in the biting dawn and the masted forms
of ships were coming out dimly, as far as the eye could reach down the
old harbour.

“Well,” Mills began again, “you may oversleep yourself.”

This suggestion was made in a cheerful tone, just as we shook hands at
the lower end of the Cannebière.  He looked very burly as he walked away
from me.  I went on towards my lodgings.  My head was very full of
confused images, but I was really too tired to think.



