During the last few days Lady Arabella had been getting exceedingly
impatient.  Her debts, always pressing, were growing to an embarrassing
amount.  The only hope she had of comfort in life was a good marriage;
but the good marriage on which she had fixed her eye did not seem to move
quickly enough--indeed, it did not seem to move at all--in the right
direction.  Edgar Caswall was not an ardent wooer.  From the very first
he seemed _difficile_, but he had been keeping to his own room ever since
his struggle with Mimi Watford.  On that occasion Lady Arabella had shown
him in an unmistakable way what her feelings were; indeed, she had made
it known to him, in a more overt way than pride should allow, that she
wished to help and support him.  The moment when she had gone across the
room to stand beside him in his mesmeric struggle, had been the very
limit of her voluntary action.  It was quite bitter enough, she felt,
that he did not come to her, but now that she had made that advance, she
felt that any withdrawal on his part would, to a woman of her class, be
nothing less than a flaming insult.  Had she not classed herself with his
nigger servant, an unreformed savage?  Had she not shown her preference
for him at the festival of his home-coming?  Had she not . . . Lady
Arabella was cold-blooded, and she was prepared to go through all that
might be necessary of indifference, and even insult, to become chatelaine
of Castra Regis.  In the meantime, she would show no hurry--she must
wait.  She might, in an unostentatious way, come to him again.  She knew
him now, and could make a keen guess at his desires with regard to Lilla
Watford.  With that secret in her possession, she could bring pressure to
bear on Caswall which would make it no easy matter for him to evade her.
The great difficulty was how to get near him.  He was shut up within his
Castle, and guarded by a defence of convention which she could not pass
without danger of ill repute to herself.  Over this question she thought
and thought for days and nights.  At last she decided that the only way
would be to go to him openly at Castra Regis.  Her rank and position
would make such a thing possible, if carefully done.  She could explain
matters afterwards if necessary.  Then when they were alone, she would
use her arts and her experience to make him commit himself.  After all,
he was only a man, with a man's dislike of difficult or awkward
situations.  She felt quite sufficient confidence in her own womanhood to
carry her through any difficulty which might arise.

From Diana's Grove she heard each day the luncheon-gong from Castra Regis
sound, and knew the hour when the servants would be in the back of the
house.  She would enter the house at that hour, and, pretending that she
could not make anyone hear her, would seek him in his own rooms.  The
tower was, she knew, away from all the usual sounds of the house, and
moreover she knew that the servants had strict orders not to interrupt
him when he was in the turret chamber.  She had found out, partly by the
aid of an opera-glass and partly by judicious questioning, that several
times lately a heavy chest had been carried to and from his room, and
that it rested in the room each night.  She was, therefore, confident
that he had some important work on hand which would keep him busy for
long spells.

Meanwhile, another member of the household at Castra Regis had schemes
which he thought were working to fruition.  A man in the position of a
servant has plenty of opportunity of watching his betters and forming
opinions regarding them.  Oolanga was in his way a clever, unscrupulous
rogue, and he felt that with things moving round him in this great
household there should be opportunities of self-advancement.  Being
unscrupulous and stealthy--and a savage--he looked to dishonest means.  He
saw plainly enough that Lady Arabella was making a dead set at his
master, and he was watchful of the slightest sign of anything which might
enhance this knowledge.  Like the other men in the house, he knew of the
carrying to and fro of the great chest, and had got it into his head that
the care exercised in its porterage indicated that it was full of
treasure.  He was for ever lurking around the turret-rooms on the chance
of making some useful discovery.  But he was as cautious as he was
stealthy, and took care that no one else watched him.

It was thus that the negro became aware of Lady Arabella's venture into
the house, as she thought, unseen.  He took more care than ever, since he
was watching another, that the positions were not reversed.  More than
ever he kept his eyes and ears open and his mouth shut.  Seeing Lady
Arabella gliding up the stairs towards his master's room, he took it for
granted that she was there for no good, and doubled his watching
intentness and caution.

Oolanga was disappointed, but he dared not exhibit any feeling lest it
should betray that he was hiding.  Therefore he slunk downstairs again
noiselessly, and waited for a more favourable opportunity of furthering
his plans.  It must be borne in mind that he thought that the heavy trunk
was full of valuables, and that he believed that Lady Arabella had come
to try to steal it.  His purpose of using for his own advantage the
combination of these two ideas was seen later in the day.  Oolanga
secretly followed her home.  He was an expert at this game, and succeeded
admirably on this occasion.  He watched her enter the private gate of
Diana's Grove, and then, taking a roundabout course and keeping out of
her sight, he at last overtook her in a thick part of the Grove where no
one could see the meeting.

Lady Arabella was much surprised.  She had not seen the negro for several
days, and had almost forgotten his existence.  Oolanga would have been
startled had he known and been capable of understanding the real value
placed on him, his beauty, his worthiness, by other persons, and compared
it with the value in these matters in which he held himself.  Doubtless
Oolanga had his dreams like other men.  In such cases he saw himself as a
young sun-god, as beautiful as the eye of dusky or even white womanhood
had ever dwelt upon.  He would have been filled with all noble and
captivating qualities--or those regarded as such in West Africa.  Women
would have loved him, and would have told him so in the overt and fervid
manner usual in affairs of the heart in the shadowy depths of the forest
of the Gold Coast.

Oolanga came close behind Lady Arabella, and in a hushed voice, suitable
to the importance of his task, and in deference to the respect he had for
her and the place, began to unfold the story of his love.  Lady Arabella
was not usually a humorous person, but no man or woman of the white race
could have checked the laughter which rose spontaneously to her lips.  The
circumstances were too grotesque, the contrast too violent, for subdued
mirth.  The man a debased specimen of one of the most primitive races of
the earth, and of an ugliness which was simply devilish; the woman of
high degree, beautiful, accomplished.  She thought that her first
moment's consideration of the outrage--it was nothing less in her
eyes--had given her the full material for thought.  But every instant
after threw new and varied lights on the affront.  Her indignation was
too great for passion; only irony or satire would meet the situation.  Her
cold, cruel nature helped, and she did not shrink to subject this
ignorant savage to the merciless fire-lash of her scorn.


