Had Stephen been better acquainted with men and women, she would have
been more satisfied with herself for being the first at the tryst.  The
conventional idea, in the minds of most women and of all men, is that a
woman should never be the first.  But real women, those in whom the heart
beats strong, and whose blood can leap, know better.  These are the
commanders of men.  In them sex calls to sex, all unconsciously at first;
and men answer to their call, as they to men's.

Two opposite feelings strove for dominance as Stephen found herself on
the hilltop, alone.  One a feeling natural enough to any one, and
especially to a girl, of relief that a dreaded hour had been postponed;
the other of chagrin that she was the first.

After a few moments, however, one of the two militant thoughts became
dominant: the feeling of chagrin.  With a pang she thought if she had
been a man and summoned for such a purpose, how she would have hurried to
the trysting-place; how the flying of her feet would have vied with the
quick rapturous beating of her heart!  With a little sigh and a blush,
she remembered that Leonard did not know the purpose of the meeting; that
he was a friend almost brought up with her since boy and girl times; that
he had often been summoned in similar terms and for the most trivial of
social purposes.

For nearly half an hour Stephen sat on the rustic seat under the shadow
of the great oak, looking, half unconscious of its beauty and yet
influenced by it, over the wide landscape stretched at her feet.

In spite of her disregard of conventions, she was no fool; the instinct
of wisdom was strong within her, so strong that in many ways it ruled her
conscious efforts.  Had any one told her that her preparations for this
interview were made deliberately with some of the astuteness that
dominated the Devil when he took Jesus to the top of a high mountain and
showed him all the kingdoms of the earth at His feet, she would have, and
with truth, denied it with indignation.  Nevertheless it was a fact that
she had, in all unconsciousness, chosen for the meeting a spot which
would evidence to a man, consciously or unconsciously, the desirability
for his own sake of acquiescence in her views and wishes.  For all this
spreading landscape was her possession, which her husband would share.  As
far as the eye could reach was within the estate which she had inherited
from her father and her uncle.

The half-hour passed in waiting had in one way its advantages to the
girl: though she was still as high strung as ever, she acquired a larger
measure of control over herself.  The nervous tension, however, was so
complete physically that all her faculties were acutely awake; very early
she became conscious of a distant footstep.

To Stephen's straining ears the footsteps seemed wondrous slow, and more
wondrous regular; she felt instinctively that she would have liked to
have listened to a more hurried succession of less evenly-marked sounds.
But notwithstanding these thoughts, and the qualms which came in their
turn, the sound of the coming feet brought great joy.  For, after all,
they were coming; and coming just in time to prevent the sense of
disappointment at their delay gaining firm foothold.  It was only when
the coming was assured that she felt how strong had been the undercurrent
of her apprehension lest they should not come at all.

Very sweet and tender and beautiful Stephen looked at this moment.  The
strong lines of her face were softened by the dark fire in her eyes and
the feeling which glowed in the deep blushes which mantled her cheeks.
The proudness of her bearing was no less marked than ever, but in the
willowy sway of her body there was a yielding of mere sorry pride.  In
all the many moods which the gods allow to good women there is none so
dear or so alluring, consciously as well as instinctively, to true men as
this self-surrender.  As Leonard drew near, Stephen sank softly into a
seat, doing so with a guilty feeling of acting a part.  When he actually
came into the grove he found her seemingly lost in a reverie as she gazed
out over the wide expanse in front of her.  He was hot after his walk,
and with something very like petulance threw himself into a cane
armchair, exclaiming as he did so with the easy insolence of old
familiarity:

'What a girl you are, Stephen! dragging a fellow all the way up here.
Couldn't you have fixed it down below somewhere if you wanted to see me?'

Strangely enough, as it seemed to her, Stephen did not dislike his tone
of mastery.  There was something in it which satisfied her.  The
unconscious recognition of his manhood, as opposed to her womanhood,
soothed her in a peaceful way.  It was easy to yield to a dominant man.
She was never more womanly than when she answered him softly:

'It was rather unfair; but I thought you would not mind coming so far.  It
is so cool and delightful here; and we can talk without being disturbed.'
Leonard was lying back in his chair fanning himself with his wide-brimmed
straw hat, with outstretched legs wide apart and resting on the back of
his heels.  He replied with grudging condescension:

'Yes, it's cool enough after the hot tramp over the fields and through
the wood.  It's not so good as the house, though, in one way: a man can't
get a drink here.  I say, Stephen, it wouldn't be half bad if there were
a shanty put up here like those at the Grands Mulets or on the
Matterhorn.  There could be a tap laid on where a fellow could quench his
thirst on a day like this!'

Before Stephen's eyes floated a momentary vision of a romantic chalet
with wide verandah and big windows looking over the landscape; a great
wide stone hearth; quaint furniture made from the gnarled branches of
trees; skins on the floor; and the walls adorned with antlers, great
horns, and various trophies of the chase.  And amongst them Leonard, in a
picturesque suit, lolling back just as at present and smiling with a
loving look in his eyes as she handed him a great blue-and-white Munich
beer mug topped with cool foam.  There was a soft mystery in her voice as
she answered:

'Perhaps, Leonard, there will some day be such a place here!'  He seemed
to grumble as he replied:

'I wish it was here now.  Some day seems a long way off!'

This seemed a good opening for Stephen; for the fear of the situation was
again beginning to assail her, and she felt that if she did not enter on
her task at once, its difficulty might overwhelm her.  She felt angry
with herself that there was a change in her voice as she said:

'Some day may mean--can mean everything.  Things needn't be a longer way
off than we choose ourselves, sometimes!'

'I say, that's a good one!  Do you mean to say that because I am some day
to own Brindehow I can do as I like with it at once, whilst the
governor's all there, and a better life than I am any day?  Unless you
want me to shoot the old man by accident when we go out on the First.'  He
laughed a short, unmeaning masculine laugh which jarred somewhat on her.
She did not, however, mean to be diverted from her main purpose, so she
went on quickly:

'You know quite well, Leonard, that I don't mean anything of the kind.
But there was something I wanted to say to you, and I wished that we
should be alone.  Can you not guess what it is?'

'No, I'll be hanged if I can!' was his response, lazily given.

Despite her resolution she turned her head; she could not meet his eyes.
It cut her with a sharp pain to notice when she turned again that he was
not looking at her.  He continued fanning himself with his hat as he
gazed out at the view.  She felt that the critical moment of her life had
come, that it was now or never as to her fulfilling her settled
intention.  So with a rush she went on her way:

'Leonard, you and I have been friends a long time.  You know my views on
some points, and that I think a woman should be as free to act as a man!'
She paused; words and ideas did not seem to flow with the readiness she
expected.  Leonard's arrogant assurance completed the dragging her back
to earth which her own self-consciousness began:

'Drive on, old girl!  I know you're a crank from Crankville on some
subjects.  Let us have it for all you're worth.  I'm on the grass and
listening.'

Stephen paused.  'A crank from Crankville!'--this after her nights of
sleepless anxiety; after the making of the resolution which had cost her
so much, and which was now actually in process of realisation.  Was it
all worth so much? why not abandon it now? . . . Abandon it!  Abandon a
resolution!  All the obstinacy of her nature--she classed it herself as
firmness--rose in revolt.  She shook her head angrily, pulled herself
together, and went on:

