'No,' said the Prince.

'As you have spoken pleasantly to me, and not been haughty like your
false brothers, I will help you and tell you how to find the Water of
Life. It flows from a fountain in the courtyard of an enchanted
castle; but you will never get in unless I give you an iron rod and
two loaves of bread. With the rod strike three times on the iron gate
of the castle, and it will spring open. Inside you will find two Lions
with wide-open jaws, but if you throw a loaf to each they will be
quiet. Then you must make haste to fetch the Water of Life before it
strikes twelve, or the gates of the castle will close and you will be
shut in.'

The Prince thanked him, took the rod and the loaves, and set off. When
he reached the castle all was just as the Dwarf had said. At the third
knock the gate flew open, and when he had pacified the Lions with the
loaves, he walked into the castle. In the great hall he found several
enchanted Princes, and he took the rings from their fingers. He also
took a sword and a loaf, which were lying by them. On passing into the
next room he found a beautiful Maiden, who rejoiced at his coming. She
embraced him, and said that he had saved her, and should have the
whole of her kingdom; and if he would come back in a year she would
marry him. She also told him where to find the fountain with the
enchanted water; but, she said, he must make haste to get out of the
castle before the clock struck twelve.

Then he went on, and came to a room where there was a beautiful bed
freshly made, and as he was very tired he thought he would take a
little rest; so he lay down and fell asleep. When he woke it was
striking a quarter to twelve. He sprang up in a fright, and ran to the
fountain, and took some of the water in a cup which was lying near,
and then hurried away. The clock struck just as he reached the iron
gate, and it banged so quickly that it took off a bit of his heel.

He was rejoiced at having got some of the Water of Life, and hastened
on his homeward journey. He again passed the Dwarf, who said, when he
saw the sword and the loaf, 'Those things will be of much service to
you. You will be able to strike down whole armies with the sword, and
the loaf will never come to an end.'

The Prince did not want to go home without his brothers, and he said,
'Good Dwarf, can you not tell me where my brothers are? They went in
search of the Water of Life before I did, but they never came back.'

'They are both stuck fast in a narrow mountain gorge. I cast a spell
over them because of their pride.'

Then the Prince begged so hard that they might be released that at
last the Dwarf yielded; but he warned him against them, and said,
'Beware of them; they have bad hearts.'

  [Illustration: {Good Dwarf, can you not tell me where my brothers
    are?}]

He was delighted to see his brothers when they came back, and told
them all that had happened to him; how he had found the Water of
Life, and brought a goblet full with him. How he had released a
beautiful Princess, who would wait a year for him and then marry him,
and he would become a great Prince.

Then they rode away together, and came to a land where famine and war
were raging. The King thought he would be utterly ruined, so great was
the destitution.

The Prince went to him and gave him the loaf, and with it he fed and
satisfied his whole kingdom. The Prince also gave him his sword, and
he smote the whole army of his enemies with it, and then he was able
to live in peace and quiet. Then the Prince took back his sword and
his loaf, and the three brothers rode on. But they had to pass through
two more countries where war and famine were raging, and each time the
Prince gave his sword and his loaf to the King, and in this way he
saved three kingdoms.

After that they took a ship and crossed the sea. During the passage
the two elder brothers said to each other, 'Our youngest brother found
the Water of Life, and we did not, so our father will give him the
kingdom which we ought to have, and he will take away our fortune from
us.'

This thought made them very vindictive, and they made up their minds
to get rid of him. They waited till he was asleep, and then they
emptied the Water of Life from his goblet and took it themselves, and
filled up his cup with salt sea water.


