How he lived was to a great extent a mystery even to himself; his
struggle for existence probably coincided in many material details with
the rather dramatic accounts he gave of it to sympathetic
acquaintances.  All that is definitely known is that he now and then
emerged from the struggle to dine at the Ritz or Carlton, correctly
garbed and with a correctly critical appetite.  On these occasions he
was usually the guest of Lucas Croyden, an amiable worldling, who had
three thousand a year and a taste for introducing impossible people to
irreproachable cookery.  Like most men who combine three thousand a
year with an uncertain digestion, Lucas was a Socialist, and he argued
that you cannot hope to elevate the masses until you have brought
plovers' eggs into their lives and taught them to appreciate the
difference between coupe Jacques and Macédoine de fruits.  His friends
pointed out that it was a doubtful kindness to initiate a boy from
behind a drapery counter into the blessedness of the higher catering,
to which Lucas invariably replied that all kindnesses were doubtful.
Which was perhaps true.

It was after one of his Adrian evenings that Lucas met his aunt, Mrs.
Mebberley, at a fashionable tea shop, where the lamp of family life is
still kept burning and you meet relatives who might otherwise have
slipped your memory.

"Who was that good-looking boy who was dining with you last night?" she
asked.  "He looked much too nice to be thrown away upon you."

Susan Mebberley was a charming woman, but she was also an aunt.

"Who are his people?" she continued, when the protégé's name (revised
version) had been given her.

"His mother lives at Beth--"

Lucas checked himself on the threshold of what was perhaps a social
indiscretion.

"Beth?  Where is it?  It sounds like Asia, Minor.  Is she mixed up with
Consular people?"

"Oh, no.  Her work lies among the poor."

This was a side-slip into truth.  The mother of Adrian was employed in
a laundry.

"I see," said Mrs. Mebberley, "mission work of some sort.  And
meanwhile the boy has no one to look after him.  It's obviously my duty
to see that he doesn't come to harm.  Bring him to call on me."

"My dear Aunt Susan," expostulated Lucas, "I really know very little
about him.  He may not be at all nice, you know, on further
acquaintance."

"He has delightful hair and a weak mouth.  I shall take him with me to
Homburg or Cairo."

"It's the maddest thing I ever heard of," said Lucas angrily.

"Well, there is a strong strain of madness in our family.  If you
haven't noticed it yourself all your friends must have."

"One is so dreadfully under everybody's eyes at Homburg.  At least you
might give him a preliminary trial at Etretat."

"And be surrounded by Americans trying to talk French?  No, thank you.
I love Americans, but not when they try to talk French. What a blessing
it is that they never try to talk English.  To-morrow at five you can
bring your young friend to call on me."'

And Lucas, realizing that Susan Mebberley was a woman as well as an
aunt, saw that she would have to be allowed to have her own way.


