A week after the _Upolu's_ departure, the _Malakula_ dropped anchor and
her skipper came ashore for a game of billiards and to gossip until the
land breeze sprang up.  Besides, as he told his super-cargo, he simply
had to come ashore, not merely to deliver the large package of seeds with
full instructions for planting from Joan, but to shock Sheldon with the
little surprise born of information he was bringing with him.

Captain Auckland played the billiards first, and it was not until he was
comfortably seated in a steamer-chair, his second whisky securely in his
hand, that he let off his bomb.

"A great piece, that Miss Lackland of yours," he chuckled.  "Claims to be
a part-owner of Berande.  Says she's your partner.  Is that straight?"

Sheldon nodded coldly.

"You don't say?  That is a surprise!  Well, she hasn't convinced Guvutu
or Tulagi of it.  They're pretty used to irregular things over there,
but--ha! ha!--" he stopped to have his laugh out and to mop his bald head
with a trade handkerchief.  "But that partnership yarn of hers was too
big to swallow, though it gave them the excuse for a few more drinks."

"There is nothing irregular about it.  It is an ordinary business
transaction."  Sheldon strove to act as though such transactions were
quite the commonplace thing on plantations in the Solomons.  "She
invested something like fifteen hundred pounds in Berande--"

"So she said."

"And she has gone to Sydney on business for the plantation."

"Oh, no, she hasn't."

"I beg pardon?" Sheldon queried.

"I said she hasn't, that's all."

"But didn't the _Upolu_ sail?  I could have sworn I saw her smoke last
Tuesday afternoon, late, as she passed Savo."

"The _Upolu_ sailed all right."  Captain Auckland sipped his whisky with
provoking slowness.  "Only Miss Lackland wasn't a passenger."

"Then where is she?"

"At Guvutu, last I saw of her.  She was going to Sydney to buy a
schooner, wasn't she?"

"Yes, yes."

"That's what she said.  Well, she's bought one, though I wouldn't give
her ten shillings for it if a nor'wester blows up, and it's about time we
had one.  This has been too long a spell of good weather to last."

"If you came here to excite my curiosity, old man," Sheldon said, "you've
certainly succeeded.  Now go ahead and tell me in a straightforward way
what has happened.  What schooner?  Where is it?  How did she happen to
buy it?"

"First, the schooner _Martha_," the skipper answered, checking his
replies off on his fingers.  "Second, the _Martha_ is on the outside reef
at Poonga-Poonga, looted clean of everything portable, and ready to go to
pieces with the first bit of lively sea.  And third, Miss Lackland bought
her at auction.  She was knocked down to her for fifty-five quid by the
third-assistant-resident-commissioner.  I ought to know.  I bid fifty
myself, for Morgan and Raff.  My word, weren't they hot!  I told them to
go to the devil, and that it was their fault for limiting me to fifty
quid when they thought the chance to salve the _Martha_ was worth more.
You see, they weren't expecting competition.  Fulcrum Brothers had no
representative present, neither had Fires, Philp Company, and the only
man to be afraid of was Nielsen's agent, Squires, and him they got drunk
and sound asleep over in Guvutu.

"'Twenty,' says I, for my bid.  'Twenty-five,' says the little girl.
'Thirty,' says I.  'Forty,' says she.  'Fifty,' says I.  'Fifty-five,'
says she.  And there I was stuck.  'Hold on,' says I; 'wait till I see my
owners.'  'No, you don't,' says she.  'It's customary,' says I.  'Not
anywhere in the world,' says she.  'Then it's courtesy in the Solomons,'
says I.

"And d'ye know, on my faith I think Burnett'd have done it, only she
pipes up, sweet and pert as you please: 'Mr. Auctioneer, will you kindly
proceed with the sale in the customary manner?  I've other business to
attend to, and I can't afford to wait all night on men who don't know
their own minds.'  And then she smiles at Burnett, as well--you know, one
of those fetching smiles, and damme if Burnett doesn't begin singing out:
'Goin', goin', goin'--last bid--goin', goin' for fifty-five
sovereigns--goin', goin', gone--to you, Miss--er--what name, please?'

"'Joan Lackland,' says she, with a smile to me; and that's how she bought
the _Martha_."

Sheldon experienced a sudden thrill.  The _Martha_!--a finer schooner
than the _Malakula_, and, for that matter, the finest in the Solomons.
She was just the thing for recruits, and she was right on the spot.  Then
he realized that for such a craft to sell at auction for fifty-five
pounds meant that there was small chance for saving her.

"But how did it happen?" he asked.  "Weren't they rather quick in selling
the _Martha_?"

"Had to.  You know the reef at Poonga-Poonga.  She's not worth tuppence
on it if any kind of a sea kicks up, and it's ripe for a nor'wester any
moment now.  The crowd abandoned her completely.  Didn't even dream of
auctioning her.  Morgan and Raff persuaded them to put her up.  They're a
co-operative crowd, you know, an organized business corporation, fore and
aft, all hands and the cook.  They held a meeting and voted to sell."

"But why didn't they stand by and try to save her?"

"Stand by!  You know Malaita.  And you know Poonga-Poonga.  That's where
they cut off the _Scottish Chiefs_ and killed all hands.  There was
nothing to do but take to the boats.  The _Martha_ missed stays going in,
and inside five minutes she was on the reef and in possession.  The
niggers swarmed over her, and they just threw the crew into the boats.  I
talked with some of the men.  They swear there were two hundred war
canoes around her inside half an hour, and five thousand bushmen on the
beach.  Said you couldn't see Malaita for the smoke of the signal fires.
Anyway, they cleared out for Tulagi."


