"Some cold water, please," she asked.  "It will take the frost out.
Del will get it."

"I hope it is not serious?"

"No."  She shook her head and smiled up to him, at the same time
working away at her ice-coated moccasins.  "There hasn't been time for
more than surface-freezing.  At the worst the skin will peel off."

An unearthly silence brooded in the cabin, broken only by Bishop
filling a basin from the water-bucket, and by Corliss seeking out his
smallest and daintiest house-moccasins and his warmest socks.

Frona, rubbing her feet vigorously, paused and looked up.  "Don't let
me chill the festivities just because I'm cold," she laughed.  "Please
go on."

Jake Cornell straightened up and cleared his throat inanely, and the
Virgin looked over-dignified; but Blanche came over and took the towel
out of Frona's hands.

"I wet my feet in the same place," she said, kneeling down and bringing
a glow to the frosted feet.

"I suppose you can manage some sort of a fit with them.  Here!"  Vance
tossed over the house-moccasins and woollen wrappings, which the two
women, with low laughs and confidential undertones, proceeded to
utilize.

"But what in the world were you doing on trail, alone, at this time of
night?" Vance asked.  In his heart he was marvelling at the coolness
and pluck with which she was carrying off the situation.

"I know beforehand that you will censure me," she replied, helping
Blanche arrange the wet gear over the fire.  "I was at Mrs. Stanton's;
but first, you must know, Miss Mortimer and I are staying at the
Pently's for a week.  Now, to start fresh again.  I intended to leave
Mrs. Stanton's before dark; but her baby got into the kerosene, her
husband had gone down to Dawson, and--well, we weren't sure of the baby
up to half an hour ago.  She wouldn't hear of me returning alone; but
there was nothing to fear; only I had not expected soft ice in such a
snap."

"How'd you fix the kid?" Del asked, intent on keeping the talk going
now that it had started.

"Chewing tobacco."  And when the laughter had subsided, she went on:
"There wasn't any mustard, and it was the best I could think of.
Besides, Matt McCarthy saved my life with it once, down at Dyea when I
had the croup.  But you were singing when I came in," she suggested.
"Do go on."

Jake Cornell hawed prodigiously.   "And I got done."

"Then you, Del.  Sing 'Flying Cloud' as you used to coming down the
river."

"Oh, 'e 'as!" said the Virgin.

"Then you sing.  I am sure you do."

She smiled into the Virgin's eyes, and that lady delivered herself of a
coster ballad with more art than she was aware.  The chill of Frona's
advent was quickly dissipated, and song and toast and merriment went
round again.  Nor was Frona above touching lips to the jelly glass in
fellowship; and she contributed her quota by singing "Annie Laurie" and
"Ben Bolt."  Also, but privily, she watched the drink saturating the
besotted souls of Cornell and the Virgin.  It was an experience, and
she was glad of it, though sorry in a way for Corliss, who played the
host lamely.

But he had little need of pity.  "Any other woman--" he said to
himself a score of times, looking at Frona and trying to picture
numerous women he had known by his mother's teapot, knocking at the
door and coming in as Frona had done.  Then, again, it was only
yesterday that it would have hurt him, Blanche's rubbing her feet; but
now he gloried in Frona's permitting it, and his heart went out in a
more kindly way to Blanche.  Perhaps it was the elevation of the
liquor, but he seemed to discover new virtues in her rugged face.

Frona had put on her dried moccasins and risen to her feet, and was
listening patiently to Jake Cornell, who hiccoughed a last incoherent
toast.

"To the--hic--man," he rumbled, cavernously, "the man--hic--that
made--that made--"

"The blessed country," volunteered the Virgin.

"True, my dear--hic.  To the man that made the blessed country.
To--hic--to Jacob Welse!"

"And a rider!" Blanche cried.  "To Jacob Welse's daughter!"

"Ay!  Standing!  And bottoms up!"

"Oh! she's a jolly good fellow," Del led off, the drink ruddying his
cheek.

"I'd like to shake hands with you, just once," Blanche said in a low
voice, while the rest were chorusing.

Frona slipped her mitten, which she had already put on, and the
pressure was firm between them.

"No," she said to Corliss, who had put on his cap and was tying the
ear-flaps; "Blanche tells me the Pently's are only half a mile from
here.  The trail is straight.  I'll not hear of any one accompanying me.

"No!"  This time she spoke so authoritatively that he tossed his cap
into the bunk.  "Good-night, all!" she called, sweeping the roisterers
with a smile.

But Corliss saw her to the door and stepped outside.  She glanced up to
him.  Her hood was pulled only partly up, and her face shone alluringly
under the starlight.

"I--Frona . . .  I wish--"

"Don't be alarmed," she whispered.  "I'll not tell on you, Vance."

He saw the mocking glint in her eyes, but tried to go on.  "I wish to
explain just how--"

"No need.  I understand.  But at the same time I must confess I do not
particularly admire your taste--"

"Frona!" The evident pain in his voice reached her.

"Oh, you big foolish!" she laughed.  "Don't I know?  Didn't Blanche
tell me she wet her feet?"

Corliss bowed his head.  "Truly, Frona, you are the most consistent
woman I ever met.  Furthermore," with a straightening of his form and a
dominant assertion in his voice, "this is not the last."

She tried to stop him, but he continued.  "I feel, I know that things
will turn out differently.  To fling your own words back at you, all
the factors have not been taken into consideration.  As for St. Vincent
. . . I'll have you yet.  For that matter, now could not be too soon!"

He flashed out hungry arms to her, but she read quicker than he moved,
and, laughing, eluded him and ran lightly down the trail.

"Come back, Frona!  Come back!" he called, "I am sorry."

"No, you're not," came the answer.  "And I'd be sorry if you were.
Good-night."

