The instant his throat was released, Sheldon struck out with his fist,
and Carin-Jama joined his brother on the ground.  The mutiny was quelled,
and five minutes more saw the brothers being carried to the hospital, and
the mutineers, marshalled by the gang-bosses, on the way to the fields.

When Sheldon came up on the veranda, he found Joan collapsed on the
steamer-chair and in tears.  The sight unnerved him as the row just over
could not possibly have done.  A woman in tears was to him an
embarrassing situation; and when that woman was Joan Lackland, from whom
he had grown to expect anything unexpected, he was really frightened.  He
glanced down at her helplessly, and moistened his lips.

"I want to thank you," he began.  "There isn't a doubt but what you saved
my life, and I must say--"

She abruptly removed her hands, showing a wrathful and tear-stained face.

"You brute!  You coward!" she cried.  "You have made me shoot a man, and
I never shot a man in my life before."

"It's only a flesh-wound, and he isn't going to die," Sheldon managed to
interpolate.

"What of that?  I shot him just the same.  There was no need for you to
jump down there that way.  It was brutal and cowardly."

"Oh, now I say--" he began soothingly.

"Go away.  Don't you see I hate you! hate you!  Oh, won't you go away!"

Sheldon was white with anger.

"Then why in the name of common sense did you shoot?" he demanded.

"Be-be-because you were a white man," she sobbed.  "And Dad would never
have left any white man in the lurch.  But it was your fault.  You had no
right to get yourself in such a position.  Besides, it wasn't necessary."

"I am afraid I don't understand," he said shortly, turning away.  "We
will talk it over later on."

"Look how I get on with the boys," she said, while he paused in the
doorway, stiffly polite, to listen.  "There's those two sick boys I am
nursing.  They will do anything for me when they get well, and I won't
have to keep them in fear of their life all the time.  It is not
necessary, I tell you, all this harshness and brutality.  What if they
are cannibals?  They are human beings, just like you and me, and they are
amenable to reason.  That is what distinguishes all of us from the lower
animals."

He nodded and went out.

"I suppose I've been unforgivably foolish," was her greeting, when he
returned several hours later from a round of the plantation.  "I've been
to the hospital, and the man is getting along all right.  It is not a
serious hurt."

Sheldon felt unaccountably pleased and happy at the changed aspect of her
mood.

"You see, you don't understand the situation," he began.  "In the first
place, the blacks have to be ruled sternly.  Kindness is all very well,
but you can't rule them by kindness only.  I accept all that you say
about the Hawaiians and the Tahitians.  You say that they can be handled
that way, and I believe you.  I have had no experience with them.  But
you have had no experience with the blacks, and I ask you to believe me.
They are different from your natives.  You are used to Polynesians.  These
boys are Melanesians.  They're blacks.  They're niggers--look at their
kinky hair.  And they're a whole lot lower than the African niggers.
Really, you know, there is a vast difference."

"They possess no gratitude, no sympathy, no kindliness.  If you are kind
to them, they think you are a fool.  If you are gentle with them they
think you are afraid.  And when they think you are afraid, watch out, for
they will get you.  Just to show you, let me state the one invariable
process in a black man's brain when, on his native heath, he encounters a
stranger.  His first thought is one of fear.  Will the stranger kill him?
His next thought, seeing that he is not killed, is: Can he kill the
stranger?  There was Packard, a Colonial trader, some twelve miles down
the coast.  He boasted that he ruled by kindness and never struck a blow.
The result was that he did not rule at all.  He used to come down in his
whale-boat to visit Hughie and me.  When his boat's crew decided to go
home, he had to cut his visit short to accompany them.  I remember one
Sunday afternoon when Packard had accepted our invitation to stop to
dinner.  The soup was just served, when Hughie saw a nigger peering in
through the door.  He went out to him, for it was a violation of Berande
custom.  Any nigger has to send in word by the house-boys, and to keep
outside the compound.  This man, who was one of Packard's boat's-crew,
was on the veranda.  And he knew better, too.  'What name?' said Hughie.
'You tell 'm white man close up we fella boat's-crew go along.  He no
come now, we fella boy no wait.  We go.'  And just then Hughie fetched
him a clout that knocked him clean down the stairs and off the veranda."

"But it was needlessly cruel," Joan objected.  "You wouldn't treat a
white man that way."

"And that's just the point.  He wasn't a white man.  He was a low black
nigger, and he was deliberately insulting, not alone his own white
master, but every white master in the Solomons.  He insulted me.  He
insulted Hughie.  He insulted Berande."

"Of course, according to your lights, to your formula of the rule of the
strong--"

"Yes," Sheldon interrupted, "but it was according to the formula of the
rule of the weak that Packard ruled.  And what was the result?  I am
still alive.  Packard is dead.  He was unswervingly kind and gentle to
his boys, and his boys waited till one day he was down with fever.  His
head is over on Malaita now.  They carried away two whale-boats as well,
filled with the loot of the store.  Then there was Captain Mackenzie of
the ketch _Minota_.  He believed in kindness.  He also contended that
better confidence was established by carrying no weapons.  On his second
trip to Malaita, recruiting, he ran into Bina, which is near Langa Langa.
The rifles with which the boat's-crew should have been armed, were locked
up in his cabin.  When the whale-boat went ashore after recruits, he
paraded around the deck without even a revolver on him.  He was
tomahawked.  His head remains in Malaita.  It was suicide.  So was
Packard's finish suicide."

"I grant that precaution is necessary in dealing with them," Joan agreed;
"but I believe that more satisfactory results can be obtained by treating
them with discreet kindness and gentleness."


