But there was nothing further from Matcham's mind.

"Dick," he said, "ye sware before the saints that ye would see me safe
to Holywood. Would ye be forsworn? Would you desert me--a perjurer?"

"Nay, I sware for the best," returned Dick. "I meant it too; but now!
But look ye, Jack, turn again with me. Let me but warn these men, and,
if needs must, stand shot with them; then shall all be clear, and I will
on again to Holywood and purge mine oath."

"Ye but deride me," answered Matcham. "These men ye go to succour are
the same that hunt me to my ruin."

Dick scratched his head.

"I cannot help it, Jack," he said. "Here is no remedy. What would ye? Ye
run no great peril, man; and these are in the way of death. Death!" he
added. "Think of it! What a murrain do ye keep me here for? Give me the
windac. St. George! shall they all die?"

"Richard Shelton," said Matcham, looking him squarely in the face,
"would ye, then, join party with Sir Daniel? Have ye not ears? Heard ye
not this Ellis, what he said? or have ye no heart for your own kindly
blood and the father that men slew? 'Harry Shelton,' he said; and Sir
Harry Shelton was your father, as the sun shines in heaven."

"What would ye?" Dick cried again. "Would ye have me credit thieves?"

"Nay, I have heard it before now," returned Matcham. "The fame goeth
currently, it was Sir Daniel slew him. He slew him under oath; in his
own house he shed the innocent blood. Heaven wearies for the avenging
on't; and you--the man's son--ye go about to comfort and defend the
murderer!"

"Jack," cried the lad, "I know not. It may be; what know I? But, see
here: This man hath bred me up and fostered me, and his men I have
hunted with and played among; and to leave them in the hour of peril--O,
man, if I did that, I were stark dead to honour! Nay, Jack, ye would not
ask it; ye would not wish me to be base."

"But your father, Dick?" said Matcham, somewhat wavering. "Your father?
and your oath to me? Ye took the saints to witness."

"My father?" cried Shelton. "Nay, he would have me go! If Sir Daniel
slew him, when the hour comes this hand shall slay Sir Daniel; but
neither him nor his will I desert in peril. And for mine oath, good
Jack, ye shall absolve me of it here. For the lives' sake of many men
that hurt you not, and for mine honour, ye shall set me free."

"I, Dick? Never!" returned Matcham. "An ye leave me, y'are forsworn, and
so I shall declare it."

"My blood heats," said Dick. "Give me the windac! Give it me!"

"I'll not," said Matcham. "I'll save you in your teeth."

"Not?" cried Dick. "I'll make you!"

"Try it," said the other.

They stood, looking in each other's eyes, each ready for a spring. Then
Dick leaped; and though Matcham turned instantly and fled, in two bounds
he was overtaken, the windac was twisted from his grasp, he was thrown
roughly to the ground, and Dick stood across him, flushed and menacing,
with doubled fist. Matcham lay where he had fallen, with his face in the
grass, not thinking of resistance.

Dick bent his bow.

"I'll teach you!" he cried, fiercely. "Oath or no oath, ye may go hang
for me!"

And he turned and began to run. Matcham was on his feet at once, and
began running after him.

"What d'ye want?" cried Dick, stopping. "What make ye after me? Stand
off!"

"I will follow an I please," said Matcham. "This wood is free to me."

"Stand back, by 'r Lady!" returned Dick, raising his bow.

"Ah, y'are a brave boy!" retorted Matcham. "Shoot!"

Dick lowered his weapon in some confusion.

"See here," he said. "Y' have done me ill enough. Go, then. Go your way
in fair wise; or, whether I will or not, I must even drive you to it."

"Well," said Matcham, doggedly, "y'are the stronger. Do your worst. I
shall not leave to follow thee, Dick, unless thou makest me," he added.

Dick was almost beside himself. It went against his heart to beat a
creature so defenceless; and, for the life of him, he knew no other way
to rid himself of this unwelcome and, as he began to think, perhaps
untrue companion.

"Y'are mad, I think," he cried. "Fool-fellow, I am hasting to your foes;
as fast as foot can carry me, go I thither."

"I care not, Dick," replied the lad. "If y'are bound to die, Dick, I'll
die too. I would liever go with you to prison than to go free without
you."

"Well," returned the other, "I may stand no longer prating. Follow me,
if ye must; but if ye play me false, it shall but little advance you,
mark ye that. Shalt have a quarrel in thine inwards, boy."

So saying, Dick took once more to his heels, keeping in the margin of
the thicket and looking briskly about him as he went. At a good pace he
rattled out of the dell, and came again into the more open quarters of
the wood. To the left a little eminence appeared, spotted with golden
gorse, and crowned with a black tuft of firs.

"I shall see from there," he thought, and struck for it across a heathy
clearing.

He had gone but a few yards, when Matcham touched him on the arm, and
pointed. To the eastward of the summit there was a dip, and, as it were,
a valley passing to the other side; the heath was not yet out; all the
ground was rusty, like an unscoured buckler, and dotted sparingly with
yews; and there, one following another, Dick saw half a score green
jerkins mounting the ascent, and marching at their head, conspicuous by
his boar-spear, Ellis Duckworth in person. One after another gained the
top, showed for a moment against the sky, and then dipped upon the
farther side, until the last was gone.

Dick looked at Matcham with a kindlier eye.

"So y'are to be true to me, Jack?" he asked. "I thought ye were of the
other party."

Matcham began to sob.

"What cheer!" cried Dick. "Now the saints behold us! would ye snivel for
a word?"

"Ye hurt me," sobbed Matcham. "Ye hurt me when ye threw me down. Y'are a
coward to abuse your strength."

"Nay, that is fool's talk," said Dick, roughly. "Y' had no title to my
windac, Master John. I would 'a' done right to have well basted you. If
ye go with me, ye must obey me; and so, come."

Matcham had half a thought to stay behind; but, seeing that Dick
continued to scour full-tilt towards the eminence and not so much as
looked across his shoulder, he soon thought better of that, and began to
run in turn. But the ground was very difficult and steep; Dick had
already a long start, and had, at any rate, the lighter heels, and he
had long since come to the summit, crawled forward through the firs, and
ensconced himself in a thick tuft of gorse, before Matcham, panting like
a deer, rejoined him, and lay down in silence by his side.

Below, in the bottom of a considerable valley, the short cut from
Tunstall hamlet wound downwards to the ferry. It was well beaten, and
the eye followed it easily from point to point. Here it was bordered by
open glades; there the forest closed upon it; every hundred yards it ran
beside an ambush. Far down the path, the sun shone on seven steel
salets, and from time to time, as the trees opened, Selden and his men
could be seen riding briskly, still bent upon Sir Daniel's mission. The
wind had somewhat fallen, but still tussled merrily with the trees, and,
perhaps, had Appleyard been there, he would have drawn a warning from
the troubled conduct of the birds.

"Now, mark," Dick whispered. "They be already well advanced into the
wood; their safety lieth rather in continuing forward. But see ye where
this wide glade runneth down before us, and in the midst of it, these
two-score trees make like an island? There were their safety. An they
but come sound as far as that, I will make shift to warn them. But my
heart misgiveth me; they are but seven against so many, and they but
carry cross-bows. The long-bow, Jack, will have the uppermost ever."

Meanwhile, Selden and his men still wound up the path, ignorant of their
danger, and momently drew nearer hand. Once, indeed, they paused, drew
into a group, and seemed to point and listen. But it was something from
far away across the plain that had arrested their attention--a hollow
growl of cannon that came, from time to time, upon the wind, and told of
the great battle. It was worth a thought, to be sure; for if the voice
of the big guns were thus become audible in Tunstall Forest, the fight
must have rolled ever eastward, and the day, by consequence, gone sore
against Sir Daniel and the lords of the dark rose.

But presently the little troop began again to move forward, and came
next to a very open, heathy portion of the way, where but a single
tongue of forest ran down to join the road. They were but just abreast
of this, when an arrow shone flying. One of the men threw up his arms,
his horse reared, and both fell and struggled together in a mass. Even
from where the boys lay they could hear the rumour of the men's voices
crying out; they could see the startled horses prancing, and, presently,
as the troop began to recover from their first surprise, one fellow
beginning to dismount. A second arrow from somewhat farther off glanced
in a wide arch; a second rider bit the dust. The man who was dismounting
lost hold upon the rein, and his horse fled galloping, and dragged him
by the foot along the road, bumping from stone to stone, and battered by
the fleeing hoofs. The four who still kept the saddle instantly broke
and scattered; one wheeled and rode, shrieking, towards the ferry; the
other three, with loose rein and flying raiment, came galloping up the
road from Tunstall. From every clump they passed an arrow sped. Soon a
horse fell, but the rider found his feet and continued to pursue his
comrades till a second shot despatched him. Another man fell; then
another horse; out of the whole troop there was but one fellow left, and
he on foot; only, in different directions, the noise of the galloping of
three riderless horses was dying fast into the distance.

All this time not one of the assailants had for a moment shown himself.
Here and there along the path, horse or man rolled, undespatched, in his
agony; but no merciful enemy broke cover to put them from their pain.

The solitary survivor stood bewildered in the road beside his fallen
charger. He had come the length of that broad glade, with the island of
timber, pointed out by Dick. He was not, perhaps, five hundred yards
from where the boys lay hidden; and they could see him plainly, looking
to and fro in deadly expectation. But nothing came; and the man began to
pluck up his courage, and suddenly unslung and bent his bow. At the same
time, by something in his action, Dick recognised Selden.

At this offer of resistance, from all about him in the covert of the
woods there went up the sound of laughter. A score of men, at least, for
this was the very thickest of the ambush, joined in this cruel and
untimely mirth. Then an arrow glanced over Selden's shoulder; and he
leaped and ran a little back. Another dart struck quivering at his heel.
He made for the cover. A third shaft leaped out right in his face, and
fell short in front of him. And then the laughter was repeated loudly,
rising and re-echoing from different thickets.

It was plain that his assailants were but baiting him, as men, in those
days, baited the poor bull, or as the cat still trifles with the mouse.
The skirmish was well over; farther down the road, a fellow in green was
already calmly gathering the arrows; and now, in the evil pleasure of
their hearts, they gave themselves the spectacle of their poor
fellow-sinner in his torture.

Selden began to understand; he uttered a roar of anger, shouldered his
cross-bow, and sent a quarrel at a venture into the wood. Chance
favoured him, for a slight cry responded. Then, throwing down his
weapon, Selden began to run before him up the glade, and almost in a
straight line for Dick and Matcham.

The companions of the Black Arrow now began to shoot in earnest. But
they were properly served; their chance had past; most of them had now
to shoot against the sun; and Selden, as he ran, bounded from side to
side to baffle and deceive their aim. Best of all, by turning up the
glade he had defeated their preparations; there were no marksmen posted
higher up than the one whom he had just killed or wounded; and the
confusion of the foresters' counsels soon became apparent. A whistle
sounded thrice, and then again twice. It was repeated from another
quarter. The woods on either side became full of the sound of people
bursting through the underwood; and a bewildered deer ran out into the
open, stood for a second on three feet, with nose in air, and then
plunged again into the thicket.

Selden still ran, bounding; ever and again an arrow followed him, but
still would miss. It began to appear as if he might escape. Dick had his
bow armed, ready to support him; even Matcham, forgetful of his
interest, took sides at heart for the poor fugitive; and both lads
glowed and trembled in the ardour of their hearts.

He was within fifty yards of them, when an arrow struck him and he fell.
He was up again, indeed, upon the instant; but now he ran staggering,
and, like a blind man, turned aside from his direction.

Dick leaped to his feet and waved to him.

"Here!" he cried. "This way! here is help! Nay, run, fellow--run!"

But just then a second arrow struck Selden in the shoulder, between the
plates of his brigandine, and, piercing through his jack, brought him,
like a stone, to earth.

"O, the poor heart!" cried Matcham, with clasped hands.

And Dick stood petrified upon the hill, a mark for archery.

Ten to one he had speedily been shot--for the foresters were furious
with themselves, and taken unawares by Dick's appearance in the rear of
their position--but instantly, out of a quarter of the wood surprisingly
near to the two lads, a stentorian voice arose, the voice of Ellis
Duckworth.

"Hold!" it roared. "Shoot not! Take him alive! It is young
Shelton--Harry's son."

And immediately after a shrill whistle sounded several times, and was
again taken up and repeated farther off. The whistle, it appeared, was
John Amend-All's battle trumpet, by which he published his directions.

"Ah, foul fortune!" cried Dick. "We are undone. Swiftly, Jack, come
swiftly!"

And the pair turned and ran back through the open pine clump that
covered the summit of the hill.



