By and by we might perceive a breach in the low barrier; the woods
ceased; a glittering point ran into the sea, tipped with an emerald
shoal the mark of entrance.  As we drew near we met a little run of
sea--the private sea of the lagoon having there its origin and end,
and here, in the jaws of the gateway, trying vain conclusions with
the more majestic heave of the Pacific.  The Casco scarce avowed a
shock; but there are times and circumstances when these harbour
mouths of inland basins vomit floods, deflecting, burying, and
dismasting ships.  For, conceive a lagoon perfectly sealed but in
the one point, and that of merely navigable width; conceive the
tide and wind to have heaped for hours together in that coral fold
a superfluity of waters, and the tide to change and the wind fall--
the open sluice of some great reservoirs at home will give an image
of the unstemmable effluxion.

We were scarce well headed for the pass before all heads were
craned over the rail.  For the water, shoaling under our board,
became changed in a moment to surprising hues of blue and grey; and
in its transparency the coral branched and blossomed, and the fish
of the inland sea cruised visibly below us, stained and striped,
and even beaked like parrots.  I have paid in my time to view many
curiosities; never one so curious as that first sight over the
ship's rail in the lagoon of Fakarava.  But let not the reader be
deceived with hope.  I have since entered, I suppose, some dozen
atolls in different parts of the Pacific, and the experience has
never been repeated.  That exquisite hue and transparency of
submarine day, and these shoals of rainbow fish, have not
enraptured me again.

Before we could raise our eyes from that engaging spectacle the
schooner had slipped betwixt the pierheads of the reef, and was
already quite committed to the sea within.  The containing shores
are so little erected, and the lagoon itself is so great, that, for
the more part, it seemed to extend without a check to the horizon.
Here and there, indeed, where the reef carried an inlet, like a
signet-ring upon a finger, there would be a pencilling of palms;
here and there, the green wall of wood ran solid for a length of
miles; and on the port hand, under the highest grove of trees, a
few houses sparkled white--Rotoava, the metropolitan settlement of
the Paumotus.  Hither we beat in three tacks, and came to an anchor
close in shore, in the first smooth water since we had left San
Francisco, five fathoms deep, where a man might look overboard all
day at the vanishing cable, the coral patches, and the many-
coloured fish.

Fakarava was chosen to be the seat of Government from nautical
considerations only.  It is eccentrically situate; the productions,
even for a low island, poor; the population neither many nor--for
Low Islanders--industrious.  But the lagoon has two good passages,
one to leeward, one to windward, so that in all states of the wind
it can be left and entered, and this advantage, for a government of
scattered islands, was decisive.  A pier of coral, landing-stairs,
a harbour light upon a staff and pillar, and two spacious
Government bungalows in a handsome fence, give to the northern end
of Rotoava a great air of consequence.  This is confirmed on the
one hand by an empty prison, on the other by a gendarmerie pasted
over with hand-bills in Tahitian, land-law notices from Papeete,
and republican sentiments from Paris, signed (a little after date)
'Jules Grevy, Perihidente.'  Quite at the far end a belfried
Catholic chapel concludes the town; and between, on a smooth floor
of white coral sand and under the breezy canopy of coco-palms, the
houses of the natives stand irregularly scattered, now close on the
lagoon for the sake of the breeze, now back under the palms for
love of shadow.

Not a soul was to be seen.  But for the thunder of the surf on the
far side, it seemed you might have heard a pin drop anywhere about
that capital city.  There was something thrilling in the unexpected
silence, something yet more so in the unexpected sound.  Here
before us a sea reached to the horizon, rippling like an inland
mere; and behold! close at our back another sea assaulted with
assiduous fury the reverse of the position.  At night the lantern
was run up and lit a vacant pier.  In one house lights were seen
and voices heard, where the population (I was told) sat playing
cards.  A little beyond, from deep in the darkness of the palm-
grove, we saw the glow and smelt the aromatic odour of a coal of
cocoa-nut husk, a relic of the evening kitchen.  Crickets sang;
some shrill thing whistled in a tuft of weeds; and the mosquito
hummed and stung.  There was no other trace that night of man,
bird, or insect in the isle.  The moon, now three days old, and as
yet but a silver crescent on a still visible sphere, shone through
the palm canopy with vigorous and scattered lights.  The alleys
where we walked were smoothed and weeded like a boulevard; here and
there were plants set out; here and there dusky cottages clustered
in the shadow, some with verandahs.  A public garden by night, a
rich and fashionable watering-place in a by-season, offer sights
and vistas not dissimilar.  And still, on the one side, stretched
the lapping mere, and from the other the deep sea still growled in
the night.  But it was most of all on board, in the dead hours,
when I had been better sleeping, that the spell of Fakarava seized
and held me.  The moon was down.  The harbour lantern and two of
the greater planets drew vari-coloured wakes on the lagoon.  From
shore the cheerful watch-cry of cocks rang out at intervals above
the organ-point of surf.  And the thought of this depopulated
capital, this protracted thread of annular island with its crest of
coco-palms and fringe of breakers, and that tranquil inland sea
that stretched before me till it touched the stars, ran in my head
for hours with delight.

So long as I stayed upon that isle these thoughts were constant.  I
lay down to sleep, and woke again with an unblunted sense of my
surroundings.  I was never weary of calling up the image of that
narrow causeway, on which I had my dwelling, lying coiled like a
serpent, tail to mouth, in the outrageous ocean, and I was never
weary of passing--a mere quarter-deck parade--from the one side to
the other, from the shady, habitable shores of the lagoon to the
blinding desert and uproarious breakers of the opposite beach.  The
sense of insecurity in such a thread of residence is more than
fanciful.  Hurricanes and tidal waves over-leap these humble
obstacles; Oceanus remembers his strength, and, where houses stood
and palms flourished, shakes his white beard again over the barren
coral.  Fakarava itself has suffered; the trees immediately beyond
my house were all of recent replantation; and Anaa is only now
recovered from a heavier stroke.  I knew one who was then dwelling
in the isle.  He told me that he and two ship captains walked to
the sea beach.  There for a while they viewed the oncoming
breakers, till one of the captains clapped suddenly his hand before
his eyes and cried aloud that he could endure no longer to behold
them.  This was in the afternoon; in the dark hours of the night
the sea burst upon the island like a flood; the settlement was
razed all but the church and presbytery; and, when day returned,
the survivors saw themselves clinging in an abattis of uprooted
coco-palms and ruined houses.


