The river Till was a wide, sluggish, clayey water, oozing out of fens,
and in this part of its course it strained among some score of
willow-covered, marshy islets.

It was a dingy stream; but upon this bright, spirited morning everything
was become beautiful.  The wind and the martens broke it up into
innumerable dimples; and the reflection of the sky was scattered over all
the surface in crumbs of smiling blue.

A creek ran up to meet the path, and close under the bank the ferryman's
hut lay snugly.  It was of wattle and clay, and the grass grew green upon
the roof.

Dick went to the door and opened it.  Within, upon a foul old russet
cloak, the ferryman lay stretched and shivering; a great hulk of a man,
but lean and shaken by the country fever.

"Hey, Master Shelton," he said, "be ye for the ferry?  Ill times, ill
times!  Look to yourself.  There is a fellowship abroad.  Ye were better
turn round on your two heels and try the bridge."

"Nay; time's in the saddle," answered Dick.  "Time will ride, Hugh
Ferryman.  I am hot in haste."

"A wilful man!" returned the ferryman, rising.  "An ye win safe to the
Moat House, y' have done lucky; but I say no more."  And then catching
sight of Matcham, "Who be this?" he asked, as he paused, blinking, on the
threshold of his cabin.

"It is my kinsman, Master Matcham," answered Dick.

"Give ye good day, good ferryman," said Matcham, who had dismounted, and
now came forward, leading the horse.  "Launch me your boat, I prithee; we
are sore in haste."

The gaunt ferryman continued staring.

"By the mass!" he cried at length, and laughed with open throat.

Matcham coloured to his neck and winced; and Dick, with an angry
countenance, put his hand on the lout's shoulder.

"How now, churl!" he cried.  "Fall to thy business, and leave mocking thy
betters."

Hugh Ferryman grumblingly undid his boat, and shoved it a little forth
into the deep water.  Then Dick led in the horse, and Matcham followed.

"Ye be mortal small made, master," said Hugh, with a wide grin;
"something o' the wrong model, belike.  Nay, Master Shelton, I am for
you," he added, getting to his oars.  "A cat may look at a king.  I did
but take a shot of the eye at Master Matcham."

"Sirrah, no more words," said Dick.  "Bend me your back."

They were by that time at the mouth of the creek, and the view opened up
and down the river.  Everywhere it was enclosed with islands.  Clay banks
were falling in, willows nodding, reeds waving, martens dipping and
piping.  There was no sign of man in the labyrinth of waters.

"My master," said the ferryman, keeping the boat steady with one oar, "I
have a shrew guess that John-a-Fenne is on the island.  He bears me a
black grudge to all Sir Daniel's.  How if I turned me up stream and
landed you an arrow-flight above the path?  Ye were best not meddle with
John Fenne."

"How, then? is he of this company?" asked Dick.

"Nay, mum is the word," said Hugh.  "But I would go up water, Dick.  How
if Master Matcham came by an arrow?" and he laughed again.

"Be it so, Hugh," answered Dick.

"Look ye, then," pursued Hugh.  "Sith it shall so be, unsling me your
cross-bow--so: now make it ready--good; place me a quarrel.  Ay, keep it
so, and look upon me grimly."

"What meaneth this?" asked Dick.

"Why, my master, if I steal you across, it must be under force or fear,"
replied the ferryman; "for else, if John Fenne got wind of it, he were
like to prove my most distressful neighbour."

"Do these churls ride so roughly?" Dick inquired.  "Do they command Sir
Daniel's own ferry?"

"Nay," whispered the ferryman, winking.  "Mark me!  Sir Daniel shall
down.  His time is out.  He shall down.  Mum!"  And he bent over his
oars.

They pulled a long way up the river, turned the tail of an island, and
came softly down a narrow channel next the opposite bank.  Then Hugh held
water in midstream.

"I must land you here among the willows," he said.

"Here is no path but willow swamps and quagmires," answered Dick.

"Master Shelton," replied Hugh, "I dare not take ye nearer down, for your
own sake now.  He watcheth me the ferry, lying on his bow.  All that go
by and owe Sir Daniel goodwill, he shooteth down like rabbits.  I heard
him swear it by the rood.  An I had not known you of old days--ay, and
from so high upward--I would 'a' let you go on; but for old days'
remembrance, and because ye had this toy with you that's not fit for
wounds or warfare, I did risk my two poor ears to have you over whole.
Content you; I can no more, on my salvation!"

Hugh was still speaking, lying on his oars, when there came a great shout
from among the willows on the island, and sounds followed as of a strong
man breasting roughly through the wood.

"A murrain!" cried Hugh.  "He was on the upper island all the while!"  He
pulled straight for shore.  "Threat me with your bow, good Dick; threat
me with it plain," he added.  "I have tried to save your skins, save you
mine!"

The boat ran into a tough thicket of willows with a crash.  Matcham,
pale, but steady and alert, at a sign from Dick, ran along the thwarts
and leaped ashore; Dick, taking the horse by the bridle, sought to
follow, but what with the animal's bulk, and what with the closeness of
the thicket, both stuck fast.  The horse neighed and trampled; and the
boat, which was swinging in an eddy, came on and off and pitched with
violence.

"It may not be, Hugh; here is no landing," cried Dick; but he still
struggled valiantly with the obstinate thicket and the startled animal.

A tall man appeared upon the shore of the island, a long-bow in his hand.
Dick saw him for an instant, with the corner of his eye, bending the bow
with a great effort, his face crimson with hurry.

"Who goes?" he shouted.  "Hugh, who goes?"

"'Tis Master Shelton, John," replied the ferryman.

"Stand, Dick Shelton!" bawled the man upon the island.  "Ye shall have no
hurt, upon the rood!  Stand!  Back out, Hugh Ferryman."

Dick cried a taunting answer.

"Nay, then, ye shall go afoot," returned the man; and he let drive an
arrow.

The horse, struck by the shaft, lashed out in agony and terror; the boat
capsized, and the next moment all were struggling in the eddies of the
river.

When Dick came up, he was within a yard of the bank; and before his eyes
were clear, his hand had closed on something firm and strong that
instantly began to drag him forward.  It was the riding-rod, that
Matcham, crawling forth upon an overhanging willow, had opportunely
thrust into his grasp.

"By the mass!" cried Dick, as he was helped ashore, "that makes a life I
owe you.  I swim like a cannon-ball."  And he turned instantly towards
the island.

Midway over, Hugh Ferryman was swimming with his upturned boat, while
John-a-Fenne, furious at the ill-fortune of his shot, bawled to him to
hurry.

"Come, Jack," said Shelton, "run for it!  Ere Hugh can hale his barge
across, or the pair of 'em can get it righted, we may be out of cry."

And adding example to his words, he began to run, dodging among the
willows, and in marshy places leaping from tussock to tussock.  He had no
time to look for his direction; all he could do was to turn his back upon
the river, and put all his heart to running.

Presently, however, the ground began to rise, which showed him he was
still in the right way, and soon after they came forth upon a slope of
solid turf, where elms began to mingle with the willows.

But here Matcham, who had been dragging far into the rear, threw himself
fairly down.

"Leave me, Dick!" he cried, pantingly; "I can no more."

Dick turned, and came back to where his companion lay.

"Nay, Jack, leave thee!" he cried.  "That were a knave's trick, to be
sure, when ye risked a shot and a ducking, ay, and a drowning too, to
save my life.  Drowning, in sooth; for why I did not pull you in along
with me, the saints alone can tell!"

"Nay," said Matcham, "I would 'a' saved us both, good Dick, for I can
swim."

"Can ye so?" cried Dick, with open eyes.  It was the one manly
accomplishment of which he was himself incapable.  In the order of the
things that he admired, next to having killed a man in single fight came
swimming.  "Well," he said, "here is a lesson to despise no man.  I
promised to care for you as far as Holywood, and, by the rood, Jack, y'
are more capable to care for me."

"Well, Dick, we're friends now," said Matcham.

"Nay, I never was unfriends," answered Dick.  "Y' are a brave lad in your
way, albeit something of a milksop, too.  I never met your like before
this day.  But, prithee, fetch back your breath, and let us on.  Here is
no place for chatter."

"My foot hurts shrewdly," said Matcham.

"Nay, I had forgot your foot," returned Dick.  "Well, we must go the
gentlier.  I would I knew rightly where we were.  I have clean lost the
path; yet that may be for the better, too.  An they watch the ferry, they
watch the path, belike, as well.  I would Sir Daniel were back with two
score men; he would sweep me these rascals as the wind sweeps leaves.
Come, Jack, lean ye on my shoulder, ye poor shrew.  Nay, y' are not tall
enough.  What age are ye, for a wager?--twelve?"

"Nay, I am sixteen," said Matcham.

"Y' are poorly grown to height, then," answered Dick.  "But take my hand.
We shall go softly, never fear.  I owe you a life; I am a good repayer,
Jack, of good or evil."

They began to go forward up the slope.

"We must hit the road, early or late," continued Dick; "and then for a
fresh start.  By the mass! but y' 'ave a rickety hand, Jack.  If I had a
hand like that, I would think shame.  I tell you," he went on, with a
sudden chuckle, "I swear by the mass I believe Hugh Ferryman took you for
a maid."

"Nay, never!" cried the other, colouring high.

"A' did, though, for a wager!" Dick exclaimed.  "Small blame to him.  Ye
look liker maid than man; and I tell you more--y' are a strange-looking
rogue for a boy; but for a hussy, Jack, ye would be right fair--ye would.
Ye would be well favoured for a wench."

"Well," said Matcham, "ye know right well that I am none."

"Nay, I know that; I do but jest," said Dick.  "Ye'll be a man before
your mother, Jack.  What cheer, my bully!  Ye shall strike shrewd
strokes.  Now, which, I marvel, of you or me, shall be first knighted,
Jack? for knighted I shall be, or die for 't.  'Sir Richard Shelton,
Knight': it soundeth bravely.  But 'Sir John Matcham' soundeth not
amiss."

"Prithee, Dick, stop till I drink," said the other, pausing where a
little clear spring welled out of the slope into a gravelled basin no
bigger than a pocket.  "And O, Dick, if I might come by anything to
eat!--my very heart aches with hunger."

"Why, fool, did ye not eat at Kettley?" asked Dick.

"I had made a vow--it was a sin I had been led into," stammered Matcham;
"but now, if it were but dry bread, I would eat it greedily."

"Sit ye, then, and eat," said Dick, "while that I scout a little forward
for the road."  And he took a wallet from his girdle, wherein were bread
and pieces of dry bacon, and, while Matcham fell heartily to, struck
farther forth among the trees.

A little beyond there was a dip in the ground, where a streamlet soaked
among dead leaves; and beyond that, again, the trees were better grown
and stood wider, and oak and beech began to take the place of willow and
elm.  The continued tossing and pouring of the wind among the leaves
sufficiently concealed the sounds of his footsteps on the mast; it was
for the ear what a moonless night is to the eye; but for all that Dick
went cautiously, slipping from one big trunk to another, and looking
sharply about him as he went.  Suddenly a doe passed like a shadow
through the underwood in front of him, and he paused, disgusted at the
chance.  This part of the wood had been certainly deserted, but now that
the poor deer had run, she was like a messenger he should have sent
before him to announce his coming; and instead of pushing farther, he
turned him to the nearest well-grown tree, and rapidly began to climb.

Luck had served him well.  The oak on which he had mounted was one of the
tallest in that quarter of the wood, and easily out-topped its neighbours
by a fathom and a half; and when Dick had clambered into the topmost fork
and clung there, swinging dizzily in the great wind, he saw behind him
the whole fenny plain as far as Kettley, and the Till wandering among
woody islets, and in front of him, the white line of high-road winding
through the forest.  The boat had been righted--it was even now midway on
the ferry.  Beyond that there was no sign of man, nor aught moving but
the wind.  He was about to descend, when, taking a last view, his eye lit
upon a string of moving points about the middle of the fen.  Plainly a
small troop was threading the causeway, and that at a good pace; and this
gave him some concern as he shinned vigorously down the trunk and
returned across the wood for his companion.



