"Well," returned Greensheve, "an John come speedily, we shall give a good
account of them.  They are not two score at the outside--I judge so by
the spacing of their sentries--and, taken where they are, lying so
widely, one score would scatter them like sparrows.  And yet, Master
Dick, an she be in Sir Daniel's power already, it will little hurt that
she should change into another's.  Who should these be?"

"I do suspect the Lord of Shoreby," Dick replied.  "When came they?"

"They began to come, Master Dick," said Greensheve, "about the time ye
crossed the wall.  I had not lain there the space of a minute ere I
marked the first of the knaves crawling round the corner."

The last light had been already extinguished in the little house when
they were wading in the wash of the breakers, and it was impossible to
predict at what moment the lurking men about the garden wall might make
their onslaught.  Of two evils, Dick preferred the least.  He preferred
that Joanna should remain under the guardianship of Sir Daniel rather
than pass into the clutches of Lord Shoreby; and his mind was made up, if
the house should be assaulted, to come at once to the relief of the
besieged.

But the time passed, and still there was no movement.  From quarter of an
hour to quarter of an hour the same signal passed about the garden wall,
as if the leader desired to assure himself of the vigilance of his
scattered followers; but in every other particular the neighbourhood of
the little house lay undisturbed.

Presently Dick's reinforcements began to arrive.  The night was not yet
old before nearly a score of men crouched beside him in the gorse.

Separating these into two bodies, he took the command of the smaller
himself, and entrusted the larger to the leadership of Greensheve.

"Now, Kit," said he to this last, "take me your men to the near angle of
the garden wall upon the beach.  Post them strongly, and wait till that
ye hear me falling on upon the other side.  It is those upon the sea
front that I would fain make certain of, for there will be the leader.
The rest will run; even let them.  And now, lads, let no man draw an
arrow; ye will but hurt friends.  Take to the steel, and keep to the
steel; and if we have the uppermost, I promise every man of you a gold
noble when I come to mine estate."

Out of the odd collection of broken men, thieves, murderers, and ruined
peasantry, whom Duckworth had gathered together to serve the purposes of
his revenge, some of the boldest and the most experienced in war had
volunteered to follow Richard Shelton.  The service of watching Sir
Daniel's movements in the town of Shoreby had from the first been irksome
to their temper, and they had of late begun to grumble loudly and
threaten to disperse.  The prospect of a sharp encounter and possible
spoils restored them to good humour, and they joyfully prepared for
battle.

Their long tabards thrown aside, they appeared, some in plain green
jerkins, and some in stout leathern jacks; under their hoods many wore
bonnets strengthened by iron plates; and, for offensive armour, swords,
daggers, a few stout boar-spears, and a dozen of bright bills, put them
in a posture to engage even regular feudal troops.  The bows, quivers,
and tabards were concealed among the gorse, and the two bands set
resolutely forward.

Dick, when he had reached the other side of the house, posted his six men
in a line, about twenty yards from the garden wall, and took position
himself a few paces in front.  Then they all shouted with one voice, and
closed upon the enemy.

These, lying widely scattered, stiff with cold, and taken at unawares,
sprang stupidly to their feet, and stood undecided.  Before they had time
to get their courage about them, or even to form an idea of the number
and mettle of their assailants, a similar shout of onslaught sounded in
their ears from the far side of the enclosure.  Thereupon they gave
themselves up for lost and ran.

In this way the two small troops of the men of the Black Arrow closed
upon the sea front of the garden wall, and took a part of the strangers,
as it were, between two fires; while the whole of the remainder ran for
their lives in different directions, and were soon scattered in the
darkness.

For all that, the fight was but beginning.  Dick's outlaws, although they
had the advantage of the surprise, were still considerably outnumbered by
the men they had surrounded.  The tide had flowed, in the meanwhile; the
beach was narrowed to a strip; and on this wet field, between the surf
and the garden wall, there began, in the darkness, a doubtful, furious,
and deadly contest.

The strangers were well armed; they fell in silence upon their
assailants; and the affray became a series of single combats.  Dick, who
had come first into the mellay, was engaged by three; the first he cut
down at the first blow, but the other two coming upon him, hotly, he was
fain to give ground before their onset.  One of these two was a huge
fellow, almost a giant for stature, and armed with a two-handed sword,
which he brandished like a switch.  Against this opponent, with his reach
of arm and the length and weight of his weapon, Dick and his bill were
quite defenceless; and had the other continued to join vigorously in the
attack, the lad must have indubitably fallen.  This second man, however,
less in stature and slower in his movements, paused for a moment to peer
about him in the darkness, and to give ear to the sounds of the battle.


