You saie truth, but surely thoccasion hath been the affection,
whiche I beare to these orders, and the grief that I feele, seyng thei
be not put in use: notwithstanding, doubt not but that I will tourne to
the purpose: as I have saied, the chief importaunce that is in
thexercise of the battailes, is to knowe how to kepe well the armies:
and bicause I tolde you that one of these battailes, ought to bee made
of fower hundred men heavie armed, I wil staie my self upon this nomber.
Thei ought then to be brought into lxxx. rankes, and five to a ranke:
afterward goyng fast, or softly, to knit them together, and to lose
them: the whiche how it is dooen, maie bee shewed better with deedes,
then with wordes. Which nedeth not gretly to be taught, for that every
manne, whom is practised in servise of warre, knoweth how this order
procedeth, whiche is good for no other, then to use the souldiours to
keepe the raie: but let us come to putte together one of these
battailes, I saie, that there is given them three facions principally,
the firste, and the moste profitablest is, to make al massive, and to
give it the facion of two squares, the second is, to make it square with
the front horned, the thirde is, to make it with a voide space in the
middest: the maner to put men together in the first facion, maie be of
twoo sortes, tho together in the first facion, maie be of twoo sortes,
thone is to double the rankes, that is, to make the seconde ranke enter
into the first, the iiii. into the third, the sixt into the fift, and so
foorth, so that where there was lxxx. rankes, five to a ranke, thei maie
become xl. rankes, x. to a ranke. Afterward cause theim to double ones
more in thesame maner, settyng the one ranke into an other, and so there
shall remain twentie rankes, twentie men to a ranke: this maketh twoo
squares aboute, for as moche as albeit that there bee as many men the
one waie, as in the other, notwithstandyng to wardes the hedde, thei
joine together, that the one side toucheth the other: but by the other
waie, thei be distant the one from the other, at least a yarde and a
haulfe, after soche sorte, that the square is moche longer, from the
backe to the fronte, then from the one side to thother: and bicause we
have at this presente, to speake often of the partes afore, of behinde,
and of the sides of these battailes, and of all the armie together,
knowe you, that when I saie either hedde or fronte, I meane the parte
afore, when I shall saie backe, the part behind, when I shall saie
flankes, the partes on the sides. The fiftie ordinarie veliti of the
battaile, muste not mingle with the other rankes, but so sone as the
battaile is facioned, thei shalbe set a long by the flankes therof. The
other waie to set together the battaile is this, and bicause it is
better then the firste, I will set it before your ives juste, how it
ought to bee ordeined. I beleve that you remember of what nomber of
menne, of what heddes it is made, and of what armours thei are armed,
then the facion, that this battaile ought to have, is (as I have saied)
of twentie rankes, twentie men to a ranke, five rankes of Pikes in the
front, and fiftene rankes of Targaettes on the backe, twoo Centurions
standying in the fronte, twoo behinde on the backe, who shall execute
the office of those, whiche the antiquitie called Tergiductori. The
Conestable with the Ansigne, and with the Drumme, shall stande in
thesame space, that is betwene the five rankes of the Pikes, and the
fiftene of the Targeaettes. Of the Peticapitaines, there shall stande
one upon every side of the ranckes, so that every one, maie have on his
side his men, those peticapitaines, whiche shalbe on the left hande, to
have their men on the right hand, those Peticapitaines, whiche shall be
on the right hand, to have their menne on the left hande: The fiftie
Veliti, muste stande a long the flankes, and on the backe of the
battaile. To mynde now, that this battaile maie be set together in this
facion, the men goyng ordinarily, it is convenient to order them thus.
Make the men to be brought into lxxx. rankes, five to a ranke, as a
little afore we have said, leavyng the Veliti either at the hedde, or at
the taile, so that thei stande out of this order: and it ought to be
ordeined, that every Centurion have behinde his back twentie rankes, and
to bee nexte behinde every Centurion, five rankes of Pikes, and the
reste Targaettes. The Conestable shall stande with the Drum, and the
Ansigne, in thesame space, whiche is betwene the Pikes, and the
Targaettes of the seconde Centurion, and to occupie the places of three
Targaette men. Of the Peticapitaines, twentie shall stand on the sides
of the rankes, of the first Centurion, on the lefte hande, and twentie
shall stande on the sides of the rankes, of the last Centurion on the
right hande. And you muste understande, that the Peticapitaine, whiche
hath to leade the Pikes, ought to have a Pike, and those that leade the
Targaettes, ought to have like weapons. Then the rankes beyng brought
into this order, and mindyng in marchyng, to bryng them into battaile,
for to make the hedde, the first Centurion must be caused to stande
still, with the firste twentie rankes, and the seconde to proceade
marchyng, and tournyng on the right hand, he must go a long the sides of
the twentie rankes that stande still, till he come to bee even with the
other Centurion, where he must also stande still, and the thirde
Centurion to procede marchyng, likewise tournyng on the right hand, and
a long the sides of the rankes that stande still, must go so farre, that
he be even with the other twoo Centurions, and he also standyng still,
the other Centurion must folowe with his rankes, likewise tournyng on
the right hande, a longe the sides of the rankes that stande still, so
farre that he come to the hed of the other, and then to stand still, and
straight waie twoo Centurions onely, shall depart from the front, and go
to the backe of the battaile, the whiche cometh to bee made in thesame
maner, and with thesame order juste, as a little afore I have shewed
you. The Veliti muste stande a long, by the flankes of thesame,
accordyng as is disposed in the first waie, whiche waie is called
redoublyng by right line, this is called redoublyng by flanke: the first
waie is more easie, this is with better order, and commeth better to
passe, and you maie better correcte it, after your owne maner, for that
in redoublyng by righte line, you muste bee ruled by the nomber, bicause
five maketh ten, ten twentie, twentie fourtie, so that with redoublyng
by right line, you cannot make a hedde of fiftene, nor of five and
twentie, nor of thirtie, nor of five and thirtie, but you must go where
thesame nomber will leade you. And yet it happeneth every daie in
particulare affaires, that it is convenient to make the forwarde with
sixe hundred, or eight hundred men, so that to redouble by right line,
should disorder you: therefore this liketh me better: that difficultie
that is, ought moste with practise, and with exercise to bee made easie.
Therefore I saie unto you, how it importeth more then any thyng, to have
the souldiours to know how to set themselves in araie quickly, and it is
necessarie to keepe theim in this battaile, to exercise theim therin,
and to make them to go apace, either forward or backward, to passe
through difficulte places, without troublyng thorder: for asmoche as the
souldiours, whiche can doe this well, be expert souldiours, and although
thei have never seen enemies in the face, thei maie be called old
souldiours, and contrariwise, those whiche cannot keepe these orders,
though thei have been in a thousande warres, thei ought alwaies to be
reputed new souldiours. This is, concernyng setting them together, when
thei are marching in small rankes: but beyng set, and after beyng broken
by some accident or chaunce, whiche groweth either of the situacion, or
of the enemie, to make that in a sodaine, thei maie come into order
againe, this is the importaunce and the difficultie, and where is
nedefull moche exercise, and moche practise, and wherin the antiquitie
bestowed moche studie. Therefore it is necessarie to doe twoo thynges,
firste to have this battaile full of countersignes, the other, to keepe
alwaies this order, that those same men maie stand alwaies in the ranke,
which thei were firste placed in: as for insample, if one have begon to
stande in the seconde, that he stande after alwaie in that, and not
onely in that self same rancke, but in that self same place: for the
observyng whereof (as I have saied) bee necessarie many countersignes.
In especially it is requisite, that the Ansigne bee after soche sorte
countersigned, that companyng with the other battailes, it maie be
knowen from theim, accordyng as the Conestable, and the Centurions have
plumes of fethers in their heddes differente, and easie to be knowen,
and that whiche importeth moste, is to ordaine that the peticapitaines
bee knowen. Whereunto the antiquitie had so moche care, that thei would
have nothing els written in their hedde peces, but the nomber that thei
were named by, callyng them firste, seconde, thirde, and fourthe xc. And
yet thei were not contented with this, but made every souldiour to have
written in his Targaet, the nomber of the ranke, and the nomber of the
place, in whiche ranke he was appoineted. Then the menne being
countersigned thus, and used to stande betwene these limites, it is an
easie thyng, thei beyng disordered, to sett theim all againe quickly
into order: considering, that the Ansigne standyng still, the
Centurions, and the Peticapitaines maie gesse their places by the iye,
and beyng brought the left of the left, the right of the right, with
their accustomed distance, the souldiours led by their rule, and by the
differences of the cognisances, maie be quickly in their proper places,
no otherwise, then as if the boordes of a tunne should bee taken a
sunder, whiche beyng first marked, moste easely maie bee set together
again, where thesame beyng not countersigned, were impossible to bryng
into order any more. These thynges, with diligence and with exercise,
are quickely taught, and quickly learned, and beyng learned, with
difficultie are forgotten: for that the newe menne, be led of the olde,
and with tyme, a Province with these exercises, may become throughly
practised in the war. It is also necessarie to teache theim, to tourne
theim selves all at ones, and when neede requires, to make of the
flankes, and of the backe, the fronte, and of the front, flankes, or
backe, whiche is moste easie: bicause it suffiseth that every manne doe
tourne his bodie, towardes thesame parte that he is commaunded, and
where thei tourne their faces, there the fronte commeth to bee. True it
is, that when thei tourne to any of the flanckes, the orders tourne out
of their proporcion: for that from the breast to the backe, there is
little difference, and from the one flancke to the other, there is verie
moche distance, the whiche is al contrarie to the ordinarie order of the
battaile: therefore it is convenient, that practise, and discrecion, doe
place them as thei ought to be: but this is small disorder, for that
moste easely by themselves, thei maie remedie it. But that whiche
importeth more, and where is requisite more practise, is when a battaile
would tourne all at ones, as though it were a whole bodie, here is meete
to have greate practise, and greate discrecion: bicause mindyng to
tourne, as for insample on the left hande, the left corner must stande
still, and those that be next to hym that standeth still, muste marche
so softly, that thei that bee in the right corner, nede not to runne:
otherwise all thing should be confounded. But bicause it happeneth
alwaies, when an armie marcheth from place to place, that the battailes,
whiche are not placed in the front, shall be driven to faight not by
hedde, but either by flancke, or by backe, so that a battaile muste in a
sodaine make of flancke, or of backe, hedde: and mindyng that like
battailes in soche cace, maie have their proporcion, as above is
declared, it is necessarie, that thei have the Pikes on thesame flancke,
that ought to be hedde, and the Peticapitaines, Centurions, and
Conestables, to resorte accordyngly to their places. Therefore to mynde
to dooe this, in plasyng them together, you must ordeine the fower skore
rankes, of five in a ranke, thus: Set all the Pikes in the first twentie
rankes, and place the Peticapitaines thereof, five in the first places,
and five in the last: the other three score rankes, whiche come after,
bee all of Targaettes, whiche come to bee three Centuries. Therefore,
the first and the laste ranke of every Centurion, would be
Peticapitaines, the Conestable with the Ansigne, and with the Drumme,
muste stande in the middest of the first Centurie of Targaettes, and the
Centurions in the hed of every Centurie. The bande thus ordained, when
you would have the Pikes to come on the left flancke, you must redouble
Centurie by Centurie, on the right flancke: if you would have them to
come on the right flancke, you must redouble theim on the lefte. And so
this battaile tourneth with the Pikes upon a flancke, and the Conestable
in the middeste: the whiche facion it hath marchyng: but the enemie
commyng, and the tyme that it would make of flancke hedde, it nedeth not
but to make every man to tourne his face, towardes thesame flancke,
where the Pikes be, and then the battaile tourneth with the rankes, and
with the heddes in thesame maner, as is aforesaied: for that every man
is in his place, excepte the Centurions, and the Centurions straight
waie, and without difficultie, place themselves: But when thei in
marchyng, should bee driven to faight on the backe, it is convenient to
ordein the rankes after soch sorte, that settyng theim in battaile, the
Pikes maie come behinde, and to doe this, there is to bee kepte no other
order, then where in orderyng the battaile, by the ordinarie, every
Centurie hath five rankes of Pikes before, to cause that thei maie have
them behind, and in all the other partes to observe thorder, whiche I
declared firste.

