
It has been said by ancient writers that to be pinched by adversity or
pampered by prosperity is the common lot of men, and that in whichever
way they are acted upon the result is the same. For when no longer urged
to war on one another by necessity, they are urged by ambition,
which has such dominion in their hearts that it never leaves them to
whatsoever heights they climb. For nature has so ordered it that while
they desire everything, it is impossible for them to have everything,
and thus their desires being always in excess of their capacity to
gratify them, they remain constantly dissatisfied and discontented. And
hence the vicissitudes in human affairs. For some seeking to enlarge
their possessions, and some to keep what they have got, wars and
enmities ensue, from which result the ruin of one country and the growth
of another.

I am led to these reflections from observing that the commons of Rome
were not content to secure themselves against the nobles by the creation
of tribunes, a measure to which they were driven by necessity, but after
effecting this, forthwith entered upon an ambitious contest with the
nobles, seeking to share with them what all men most esteem, namely,
their honours and their wealth. Hence was bred that disorder from which
sprang the feuds relating to the Agrarian Laws, and which led in the end
to the downfall of the Roman republic. And although it should be the
object of every well-governed commonwealth to make the State rich and
keep individual citizens poor it must be allowed that in the matter of
this law the city of Rome was to blame; whether for having passed it at
first in such a shape as to require it to be continually recast; or
for having postponed it so long that its retrospective effect was the
occasion of tumult; or else, because, although rightly framed at first,
it had come in its operation to be perverted. But in whatever way it
happened, so it was, that this law was never spoken of in Rome without
the whole city being convulsed.
