EKATERENBURG, geographically, is an Asiatic city; for it is situated
beyond the Ural Mountains, on the farthest eastern slopes of the chain.
Nevertheless, it belongs to the government of Perm; and, consequently,
is included in one of the great divisions of European Russia. It is as
though a morsel of Siberia lay in Russian jaws.

Neither Michael nor his companions were likely to experience the
slightest difficulty in obtaining means of continuing their journey in
so large a town as Ekaterenburg. It was founded in 1723, and has since
become a place of considerable size, for in it is the chief mint of the
empire. There also are the headquarters of the officials employed in
the management of the mines. Thus the town is the center of an important
district, abounding in manufactories principally for the working and
refining of gold and platina.

Just now the population of Ekaterenburg had greatly increased; many
Russians and Siberians, menaced by the Tartar invasion, having collected
there. Thus, though it had been so troublesome a matter to find horses
and vehicles when going to Ekaterenburg, there was no difficulty in
leaving it; for under present circumstances few travelers cared to
venture on the Siberian roads.

So it happened that Blount and Alcide had not the slightest trouble in
replacing, by a sound telga, the famous demi-carriage which had managed
to take them to Ekaterenburg. As to Michael, he retained his tarantass,
which was not much the worse for its journey across the Urals; and he
had only to harness three good horses to it to take him swiftly over the
road to Irkutsk.

As far as Tioumen, and even up to Novo-Zaimskoe, this road has slight
inclines, which gentle undulations are the first signs of the slopes of
the Ural Mountains. But after Novo-Zaimskoe begins the immense steppe.

At Ichim, as we have said, the reporters intended to stop, that is
at about four hundred and twenty miles from Ekaterenburg. There they
intended to be guided by circumstances as to their route across the
invaded country, either together or separately, according as their
news-hunting instinct set them on one track or another.

This road from Ekaterenburg to Ichim--which passes through Irkutsk--was
the only one which Michael could take. But, as he did not run after
news, and wished, on the contrary, to avoid the country devastated by
the invaders, he determined to stop nowhere.

"I am very happy to make part of my journey in your company," said he to
his new companions, "but I must tell you that I am most anxious to reach
Omsk; for my sister and I are going to rejoin our mother. Who can
say whether we shall arrive before the Tartars reach the town! I must
therefore stop at the post-houses only long enough to change horses, and
must travel day and night."

"That is exactly what we intend doing," replied Blount.

"Good," replied Michael; "but do not lose an instant. Buy or hire a
carriage whose--"

"Whose hind wheels," added Alcide, "are warranted to arrive at the same
time as its front wheels."

Half an hour afterwards the energetic Frenchman had found a tarantass in
which he and his companion at once seated themselves. Michael and Nadia
once more entered their own carriage, and at twelve o'clock the two
vehicles left the town of Ekaterenburg together.

Nadia was at last in Siberia, on that long road which led to Irkutsk.
What must then have been the thoughts of the young girl? Three strong
swift horses were taking her across that land of exile where her parent
was condemned to live, for how long she knew not, and so far from his
native land. But she scarcely noticed those long steppes over which the
tarantass was rolling, and which at one time she had despaired of ever
seeing, for her eyes were gazing at the horizon, beyond which she knew
her banished father was. She saw nothing of the country across which she
was traveling at the rate of fifteen versts an hour; nothing of these
regions of Western Siberia, so different from those of the east. Here,
indeed, were few cultivated fields; the soil was poor, at least at the
surface, but in its bowels lay hid quantities of iron, copper, platina,
and gold. How can hands be found to cultivate the land, when it pays
better to burrow beneath the earth? The pickaxe is everywhere at work;
the spade nowhere.

However, Nadia's thoughts sometimes left the provinces of Lake Baikal,
and returned to her present situation. Her father's image faded away,
and was replaced by that of her generous companion as he first appeared
on the Vladimir railroad. She recalled his attentions during that
journey, his arrival at the police-station, the hearty simplicity with
which he had called her sister, his kindness to her in the descent of
the Volga, and then all that he did for her on that terrible night of
the storm in the Urals, when he saved her life at the peril of his own.

Thus Nadia thought of Michael. She thanked God for having given her such
a gallant protector, a friend so generous and wise. She knew that she
was safe with him, under his protection. No brother could have done
more than he. All obstacles seemed cleared away; the performance of her
journey was but a matter of time.

Michael remained buried in thought. He also thanked God for having
brought about this meeting with Nadia, which at the same time enabled
him to do a good action, and afforded him additional means for
concealing his true character. He delighted in the young girl's calm
intrepidity. Was she not indeed his sister? His feeling towards his
beautiful and brave companion was rather respect than affection. He felt
that hers was one of those pure and rare hearts which are held by all in
high esteem.

However, Michael's dangers were now beginning, since he had reached
Siberian ground. If the reporters were not mistaken, if Ivan Ogareff had
really passed the frontier, all his actions must be made with extreme
caution. Things were now altered; Tartar spies swarmed in the Siberian
provinces. His incognito once discovered, his character as courier of
the Czar known, there was an end of his journey, and probably of his
life. Michael felt now more than ever the weight of his responsibility.

While such were the thoughts of those occupying the first carriage, what
was happening in the second? Nothing out of the way. Alcide spoke in
sentences; Blount replied by monosyllables. Each looked at everything
in his own light, and made notes of such incidents as occurred on the
journey--few and but slightly varied--while they crossed the provinces
of Western Siberia.

At each relay the reporters descended from their carriage and found
themselves with Michael. Except when meals were to be taken at the
post-houses, Nadia did not leave the tarantass. When obliged to
breakfast or dine, she sat at table, but was always very reserved, and
seldom joined in conversation.

Alcide, without going beyond the limits of strict propriety, showed that
he was greatly struck by the young girl. He admired the silent energy
which she showed in bearing all the fatigues of so difficult a journey.

The forced stoppages were anything but agreeable to Michael; so he
hastened the departure at each relay, roused the innkeepers, urged on
the iemschiks, and expedited the harnessing of the tarantass. Then the
hurried meal over--always much too hurried to agree with Blount, who was
a methodical eater--they started, and were driven as eagles, for they
paid like princes.

It need scarcely be said that Blount did not trouble himself about the
girl at table. That gentleman was not in the habit of doing two things
at once. She was also one of the few subjects of conversation which he
did not care to discuss with his companion.

Alcide having asked him, on one occasion, how old he thought the girl,
"What girl?" he replied, quite seriously.

"Why, Nicholas Korpanoff's sister."

"Is she his sister?"

"No; his grandmother!" replied Alcide, angry at his indifference. "What
age should you consider her?"

"Had I been present at her birth I might have known."

Very few of the Siberian peasants were to be seen in the fields. These
peasants are remarkable for their pale, grave faces, which a celebrated
traveler has compared to those of the Castilians, without the
haughtiness of the latter. Here and there some villages already deserted
indicated the approach of the Tartar hordes. The inhabitants, having
driven off their flocks of sheep, their camels, and their horses, were
taking refuge in the plains of the north. Some tribes of the wandering
Kirghiz, who remained faithful, had transported their tents beyond the
Irtych, to escape the depredations of the invaders.

Happily, post traveling was as yet uninterrupted; and telegraphic
communication could still be effected between places connected with the
wire. At each relay horses were to be had on the usual conditions. At
each telegraphic station the clerks transmitted messages delivered to
them, delaying for State dispatches alone.

Thus far, then, Michael's journey had been accomplished satisfactorily.
The courier of the Czar had in no way been impeded; and, if he could
only get on to Krasnoiarsk, which seemed the farthest point attained by
Feofar-Khan's Tartars, he knew that he could arrive at Irkutsk, before
them. The day after the two carriages had left Ekaterenburg they reached
the small town of Toulouguisk at seven o'clock in the morning, having
covered two hundred and twenty versts, no event worthy of mention having
occurred. The same evening, the 22d of July, they arrived at Tioumen.

Tioumen, whose population is usually ten thousand inhabitants,
then contained double that number. This, the first industrial town
established by the Russians in Siberia, in which may be seen a fine
metal-refining factory and a bell foundry, had never before presented
such an animated appearance. The correspondents immediately went off
after news. That brought by Siberian fugitives from the seat of war was
far from reassuring. They said, amongst other things, that Feofar-Khan's
army was rapidly approaching the valley of the Ichim, and they confirmed
the report that the Tartar chief was soon to be joined by Colonel
Ogareff, if he had not been so already. Hence the conclusion was
that operations would be pushed in Eastern Siberia with the greatest
activity. However, the loyal Cossacks of the government of Tobolsk were
advancing by forced marches towards Tomsk, in the hope of cutting off
the Tartar columns.

At midnight the town of Novo-Saimsk was reached; and the travelers now
left behind them the country broken by tree-covered hills, the last
remains of the Urals.

Here began the regular Siberian steppe which extends to the neighborhood
of Krasnoiarsk. It is a boundless plain, a vast grassy desert; earth
and sky here form a circle as distinct as that traced by a sweep of the
compasses. The steppe presents nothing to attract notice but the long
line of the telegraph posts, their wires vibrating in the breeze like
the strings of a harp. The road could be distinguished from the rest of
the plain only by the clouds of fine dust which rose under the wheels
of the tarantass. Had it not been for this white riband, which stretched
away as far as the eye could reach, the travelers might have thought
themselves in a desert.

Michael and his companions again pressed rapidly forward. The horses,
urged on by the iemschik, seemed to fly over the ground, for there
was not the slightest obstacle to impede them. The tarantass was going
straight for Ichim, where the two correspondents intended to stop, if
nothing happened to make them alter their plans.

A hundred and twenty miles separated Novo-Saimsk from the town of Ichim,
and before eight o'clock the next evening the distance could and should
be accomplished if no time was lost. In the opinion of the iemschiks,
should the travelers not be great lords or high functionaries, they were
worthy of being so, if it was only for their generosity in the matter of
"na vodkou."

On the afternoon of the next day, the 23rd of July, the two carriages
were not more than thirty versts from Ichim. Suddenly Michael
caught sight of a carriage--scarcely visible among the clouds of
dust--preceding them along the road. As his horses were evidently less
fatigued than those of the other traveler, he would not be long
in overtaking it. This was neither a tarantass nor a telga, but
a post-berlin, which looked as if it had made a long journey. The
postillion was thrashing his horses with all his might, and only kept
them at a gallop by dint of abuse and blows. The berlin had certainly
not passed through Novo-Saimsk, and could only have struck the Irkutsk
road by some less frequented route across the steppe.

Our travelers' first thought, on seeing this berlin, was to get in
front of it, and arrive first at the relay, so as to make sure of fresh
horses. They said a word to their iemschiks, who soon brought them up
with the berlin.

Michael Strogoff came up first. As he passed, a head was thrust out of
the window of the berlin.

He had not time to see what it was like, but as he dashed by he
distinctly heard this word, uttered in an imperious tone: "Stop!"

But they did not stop; on the contrary, the berlin was soon distanced by
the two tarantasses.

It now became a regular race; for the horses of the berlin--no doubt
excited by the sight and pace of the others--recovered their strength
and kept up for some minutes. The three carriages were hidden in a
cloud of dust. From this cloud issued the cracking of whips mingled with
excited shouts and exclamations of anger.

Nevertheless, the advantage remained with Michael and his companions,
which might be very important to them if the relay was poorly provided
with horses. Two carriages were perhaps more than the postmaster could
provide for, at least in a short space of time.

Half an hour after the berlin was left far behind, looking only a speck
on the horizon of the steppe.

It was eight o'clock in the evening when the two carriages reached
Ichim. The news was worse and worse with regard to the invasion. The
town itself was menaced by the Tartar vanguard; and two days before the
authorities had been obliged to retreat to Tobolsk. There was not an
officer nor a soldier left in Ichim.

On arriving at the relay, Michael Strogoff immediately asked for horses.
He had been fortunate in distancing the berlin. Only three horses were
fit to be harnessed. The others had just come in worn out from a long
stage.

As the two correspondents intended to stop at Ichim, they had not to
trouble themselves to find transport, and had their carriage put away.
In ten minutes Michael was told that his tarantass was ready to start.

"Good," said he.

Then turning to the two reporters: "Well, gentlemen, the time is come
for us to separate."

"What, Mr. Korpanoff," said Alcide Jolivet, "shall you not stop even for
an hour at Ichim?"

"No, sir; and I also wish to leave the post-house before the arrival of
the berlin which we distanced."

"Are you afraid that the traveler will dispute the horses with you?"

"I particularly wish to avoid any difficulty."

"Then, Mr. Korpanoff," said Jolivet, "it only remains for us to thank
you once more for the service you rendered us, and the pleasure we have
had in traveling with you."

"It is possible that we shall meet you again in a few days at Omsk,"
added Blount.

"It is possible," answered Michael, "since I am going straight there."

"Well, I wish you a safe journey, Mr. Korpanoff," said Alcide, "and
Heaven preserve you from telgas."

The two reporters held out their hands to Michael with the intention of
cordially shaking his, when the sound of a carriage was heard outside.
Almost immediately the door was flung open and a man appeared.

It was the traveler of the berlin, a military-looking man, apparently
about forty years of age, tall, robust in figure, broad-shouldered, with
a strongly-set head, and thick mus-taches meeting red whiskers. He wore
a plain uniform. A cavalry saber hung at his side, and in his hand he
held a short-handled whip.

"Horses," he demanded, with the air of a man accustomed to command.

"I have no more disposable horses," answered the postmaster, bowing.

"I must have some this moment."

"It is impossible.
