'Show me! You're a fine fellow, a regular Snatcher!' replied the old
man, also whispering.

Having gone a few steps Lukashka stopped, stooped down over a puddle,
and whistled. 'That's where they come to drink, d'you see?' He spoke in
a scarcely audible voice, pointing to fresh hoof-prints.

'Christ bless you,' answered the old man. 'The boar will be in the
hollow beyond the ditch,' he added. Til watch, and you can go.'

Lukashka pulled his cloak up higher and walked back alone, throwing
swift glances now to the left at the wall of reeds, now to the Terek
rushing by below the bank. 'I daresay he's watching or creeping along
somewhere,' thought he of a possible Chechen hillsman. Suddenly a loud
rustling and a splash in the water made him start and seize his musket.
From under the bank a boar leapt up--his dark outline showing for a
moment against the glassy surface of the water and then disappearing
among the reeds. Lukashka pulled out his gun and aimed, but before he
could fire the boar had disappeared in the thicket. Lukashka spat with
vexation and went on. On approaching the ambuscade he halted again and
whistled softly. His whistle was answered and he stepped up to his
comrades.

Nazarka, all curled up, was already asleep. Ergushov sat with his legs
crossed and moved slightly to make room for Lukashka.

'How jolly it is to sit here! It's really a good place,' said he. 'Did
you take him there?'

'Showed him where,' answered Lukashka, spreading out his cloak. 'But
what a big boar I roused just now close to the water! I expect it was
the very one! You must have heard the crash?'

'I did hear a beast crashing through. I knew at once it was a beast. I
thought to myself: "Lukashka has roused a beast,"' Ergushov said,
wrapping himself up in his cloak. 'Now I'll go to sleep,' he added.
'Wake me when the cocks crow. We must have discipline. I'll lie down
and have a nap, and then you will have a nap and I'll watch--that's the
way.'

'Luckily I don't want to sleep,' answered Lukashka.

The night was dark, warm, and still. Only on one side of the sky the
stars were shining, the other and greater part was overcast by one huge
cloud stretching from the mountaintops. The black cloud, blending in
the absence of any wind with the mountains, moved slowly onwards, its
curved edges sharply denned against the deep starry sky. Only in front
of him could the Cossack discern the Terek and the distance beyond.
Behind and on both sides he was surrounded by a wall of reeds.
Occasionally the reeds would sway and rustle against one another
apparently without cause. Seen from down below, against the clear part
of the sky, their waving tufts looked like the feathery branches of
trees. Close in front at his very feet was the bank, and at its base
the rushing torrent. A little farther on was the moving mass of glassy
brown water which eddied rhythmically along the bank and round the
shallows. Farther still, water, banks, and cloud all merged together in
impenetrable gloom. Along the surface of the water floated black
shadows, in which the experienced eyes of the Cossack detected trees
carried down by the current. Only very rarely sheet-lightning, mirrored
in the water as in a black glass, disclosed the sloping bank opposite.
The rhythmic sounds of night--the rustling of the reeds, the snoring of
the Cossacks, the hum of mosquitoes, and the rushing water, were every
now and then broken by a shot fired in the distance, or by the gurgling
of water when a piece of bank slipped down, the splash of a big fish,
or the crashing of an animal breaking through the thick undergrowth in
the wood. Once an owl flew past along the Terek, flapping one wing
against the other rhythmically at every second beat. Just above the
Cossack's head it turned towards the wood and then, striking its wings
no longer after every other flap but at every flap, it flew to an old
plane tree where it rustled about for a long time before settling down
among the branches. At every one of these unexpected sounds the
watching Cossack listened intently, straining his hearing, and screwing
up his eyes while he deliberately felt for his musket.

The greater part of the night was past. The black cloud that had moved
westward revealed the clear starry sky from under its torn edge, and
the golden upturned crescent of the moon shone above the mountains with
a reddish light. The cold began to be penetrating. Nazarka awoke, spoke
a little, and fell asleep again. Lukashka feeling bored got up, drew
the knife from his dagger-handle and began to fashion his stick into a
ramrod. His head was full of the Chechens who lived over there in the
mountains, and of how their brave lads came across and were not afraid
of the Cossacks, and might even now be crossing the river at some other
spot. He thrust himself out of his hiding-place and looked along the
river but could see nothing. And as he continued looking out at
intervals upon the river and at the opposite bank, now dimly
distinguishable from the water in the faint moonlight, he no longer
thought about the Chechens but only of when it would be time to wake
his comrades, and of going home to the village. In the village he
imagined Dunayka, his 'little soul', as the Cossacks call a man's
mistress, and thought of her with vexation. Silvery mists, a sign of
coming morning, glittered white above the water, and not far from him
young eagles were whistling and flapping their wings. At last the
crowing of a cock reached him from the distant village, followed by the
long-sustained note of another, which was again answered by yet other
voices.

