Maryanka now smiled outright and unfastened the neckband of her smock.

'Don't take them all,' she said.

'Really I felt so dull all the time without you, I swear I did,' he
said in a calm, restrained whisper, helping himself to some seeds out
of the bosom of the girl's smock, and stooping still closer over her he
continued with laughing eyes to talk to her in low tones.

'I won't come, I tell you,' Maryanka suddenly said aloud, leaning away
from him.

'No really ... what I wanted to say to you, ...' whispered Lukashka.
'By the Heavens! Do come!'

Maryanka shook her head, but did so with a smile.

'Nursey Maryanka! Hallo Nursey! Mammy is calling! Supper time!' shouted
Maryanka's little brother, running towards the group.

'I'm coming,' replied the girl. 'Go, my dear, go alone--I'll come in a
minute.'

Lukashka rose and raised his cap.

'I expect I had better go home too, that will be best,' he said, trying
to appear unconcerned but hardly able to repress a smile, and he
disappeared behind the corner of the house.

Meanwhile night had entirely enveloped the village. Bright stars were
scattered over the dark sky. The streets became dark and empty. Nazarka
remained with the women on the earth-bank and their laughter was still
heard, but Lukashka, having slowly moved away from the girls, crouched
down like a cat and then suddenly started running lightly, holding his
dagger to steady it: not homeward, however, but towards the cornet's
house. Having passed two streets he turned into a lane and lifting the
skirt of his coat sat down on the ground in the shadow of a fence. 'A
regular cornet's daughter!' he thought about Maryanka. 'Won't even have
a lark--the devil! But just wait a bit.'

The approaching footsteps of a woman attracted his attention. He began
listening, and laughed all by himself. Maryanka with bowed head,
striking the pales of the fences with a switch, was walking with rapid
regular strides straight towards him. Lukashka rose. Maryanka started
and stopped.

'What an accursed devil! You frightened me! So you have not gone home?'
she said, and laughed aloud.

Lukashka put one arm round her and with the other hand raised her face.
'What I wanted to tell you, by Heaven!' his voice trembled and broke.

'What are you talking of, at night time!' answered Maryanka. 'Mother is
waiting for me, and you'd better go to your sweetheart.'

And freeing herself from his arms she ran away a few steps. When she
had reached the wattle fence of her home she stopped and turned to the
Cossack who was running beside her and still trying to persuade her to
stay a while with him.

'Well, what do you want to say, midnight-gadabout?' and she again began
laughing.

'Don't laugh at me, Maryanka! By the Heaven! Well, what if I have a
sweetheart? May the devil take her! Only say the word and now I'll love
you--I'll do anything you wish. Here they are!' and he jingled the
money in his pocket. 'Now we can live splendidly. Others have
pleasures, and I? I get no pleasure from you, Maryanka dear!'

The girl did not answer. She stood before him breaking her switch into
little bits with a rapid movement of her fingers.

Lukashka suddenly clenched his teeth and fists.

'And why keep waiting and waiting? Don't I love you, darling? You can
do what you like with me,' said he suddenly, frowning angrily and
seizing both her hands.

The calm expression of Maryanka's face and voice did not change.

'Don't bluster, Lukashka, but listen to me,' she answered, not pulling
away her hands but holding the Cossack at arm's length. 'It's true I am
a girl, but you listen to me! It does not depend on me, but if you love
me I'll tell you this. Let go my hands, I'll tell you without.--I'll
marry you, but you'll never get any nonsense from me,' said Maryanka
without turning her face.

'What, you'll marry me? Marriage does not depend on us. Love me
yourself, Maryanka dear,' said Lukashka, from sullen and furious
becoming again gentle, submissive, and tender, and smiling as he looked
closely into her eyes.

Maryanka clung to him and kissed him firmly on the lips.

'Brother dear!' she whispered, pressing him convulsively to her. Then,
suddenly tearing herself away, she ran into the gate of her house
without looking round.

In spite of the Cossack's entreaties to wait another minute to hear
what he had to say, Maryanka did not stop.

'Go,' she cried, 'you'll be seen! I do believe that devil, our lodger,
is walking about the yard.'

'Cornet's daughter,' thought Lukashka. 'She will marry me. Marriage is
all very well, but you just love me!'

He found Nazarka at Yamka's house, and after having a spree with him
went to Dunayka's house, where, in spite of her not being faithful to
him, he spent the night.


