        That spring, whenever possible, K. usually spent his evenings
after work - he usually stayed in the office until nine o'clock - with a
short walk, either by himself or in the company of some of the bank
officials, and then he would go into a pub where he would sit at the
regulars' table with mostly older men until eleven.  There were,
however, also exceptions to this habit, times, for instance, when K. was
invited by the bank's manager (whom he greatly respected for his
industry and trustworthiness) to go with him for a ride in his car or to
eat dinner with him at his large house.  K. would also go, once a week,
to see a girl called Elsa who worked as a waitress in a wine bar through
the night until late in the morning.  During the daytime she only
received visitors while still in bed.

        That evening, though, - the day had passed quickly with a lot of
hard work and many respectful and friendly birthday greetings - K.
wanted to go straight home.  Each time he had any small break from the
day's work he considered, without knowing exactly what he had in mind,
that Mrs. Grubach's flat seemed to have been put into great disarray by
the events of that morning, and that it was up to him to put it back
into order.  Once order had been restored, every trace of those events
would have been erased and everything would take its previous course
once more.  In particular, there was nothing to fear from the three bank
officials, they had immersed themselves back into their paperwork and
there was no alteration to be seen in them.  K. had called each of them,
separately or all together, into his office that day for no other reason
than to observe them; he was always satisfied and had always been able
to let them go again.

        At half past nine that evening, when he arrived back in front of
the building where he lived, he met a young lad in the doorway who was
standing there, his legs apart and smoking a pipe.  "Who are you?"
immediately asked K., bringing his face close to the lad's, as it was
hard to see in the half light of the landing.  "I'm the landlord's son,
sir," answered the lad, taking the pipe from his mouth and stepping to
one side.  "The landlord's son?" asked K., and impatiently knocked on
the ground with his stick.  "Did you want anything, sir?  Would you like
me to fetch my father?"  "No, no," said K., there was something
forgiving in his voice, as if the boy had harmed him in some way and he
was excusing him.  "It's alright," he said then, and went on, but before
going up the stairs he turned round once more.

        He could have gone directly to his room, but as he wanted to speak
with Mrs. Grubach he went straight to her door and knocked.  She was sat
at the table with a knitted stocking and a pile of old stockings in
front of her.  K. apologised, a little embarrassed at coming so late,
but Mrs. Grubach was very friendly and did not want to hear any apology,
she was always ready to speak to him, he knew very well that he was her
best and her favourite tenant.  K. looked round the room, it looked
exactly as it usually did, the breakfast dishes, which had been on the
table by the window that morning, had already been cleared away.  "A
woman's hands will do many things when no-one's looking," he thought, he
might himself have smashed all the dishes on the spot but certainly
would not have been able to carry it all out.  He looked at Mrs. Grubach
with some gratitude.  "Why are you working so late?" he asked.  They
were now both sitting at the table, and K. now and then sank his hands
into the pile of stockings.  "There's a lot of work to do," she said,
"during the day I belong to the tenants; if I'm to sort out my own
things there are only the evenings left to me."  "I fear I may have
caused you some exceptional work today."  "How do you mean, Mr. K.?" she
asked, becoming more interested and leaving her work in her lap.  "I
mean the men who were here this morning."  "Oh, I see," she said, and
went peacefully back to what she was doing, "that was no trouble, not
especially."  K. looked on in silence as she took up the knitted
stocking once more.  She seems surprised at my mentioning it, he
thought, she seems to think it's improper for me to mention it.  All the
more important for me to do so.  An old woman is the only person I can
speak about it with.  "But it must have caused some work for you," he
said then, "but it won't happen again." "No, it can't happen again," she
agreed, and smiled at K. in a way that was almost pained.  "Do you mean
that seriously?" asked K.  "Yes," she said, more gently, "but the
important thing is you mustn't take it too hard.  There are so many
awful things happening in the world!  As you're being so honest with me,
Mr. K., I can admit to you that I listened to a little of what was going
on from behind the door, and that those two policemen told me one or two
things as well.  It's all to do with your happiness, and that's
something that's quite close to my heart, perhaps more than it should be
as I am, after all, only your landlady. Anyway, so I heard one or two
things but I can't really say that it's about anything very serious.
No.  You have been arrested, but it's not in the same way as when they
arrest a thief.  If you're arrested in the same way as a thief, then
it's bad, but an arrest like this ... .  It seems to me that it's
something very complicated - forgive me if I'm saying something stupid -
something very complicated that I don't understand, but something that
you don't really need to understand anyway."

        "There's nothing stupid about what you've said, Mrs. Grubach, or
at least I partly agree with you, only, the way I judge the whole thing
is harsher than yours, and think it's not only not something complicated
but simply a fuss about nothing.  I was just caught unawares, that's
what happened.  If I had got up as soon as I was awake without letting
myself get confused because Anna wasn't there, if I'd got up and paid no
regard to anyone who might have been in my way and come straight to you,
if I'd done something like having my breakfast in the kitchen as an
exception, asked you to bring my clothes from my room, in short, if I
had behaved sensibly then nothing more would have happened, everything
that was waiting to happen would have been stifled.  People are so often
unprepared.  In the bank, for example, I am well prepared, nothing of
this sort could possibly happen to me there, I have my own assistant
there, there are telephones for internal and external calls in front of
me on the desk, I continually receive visits from people,
representatives, officials, but besides that, and most importantly, I'm
always occupied with my work, that's to say I'm always alert, it would
even be a pleasure for me to find myself faced with something of that
sort.  But now it's over with, and I didn't really even want to talk
about it any more, only I wanted to hear what you, as a sensible woman,
thought about it all, and I'm very glad to hear that we're in agreement.
But now you must give me your hand, an agreement of this sort needs to
be confirmed with a handshake."

        Will she shake hands with me?  The supervisor didn't shake hands,
he thought, and looked at the woman differently from before, examining
her.  She stood up, as he had also stood up, and was a little self-
conscious, she hadn't been able to understand everything that K.
said.  As a result of this self consciousness she said something that
she certainly did not intend and certainly was not appropriate.  "Don't
take it so hard, Mr. K.," she said, with tears in her voice and also, of
course, forgetting the handshake.  "I didn't know I was taking it hard,"
said K., feeling suddenly tired and seeing that if this woman did agree
with him it was of very little value.

        Before going out the door he asked, "Is Miss Bürstner home?"
"No," said Mrs. Grubach, smiling as she gave this simple piece of
information, saying something sensible at last.  "She's at the theatre.
Did you want to see her?  Should I give her a message?"  "I, er, I just
wanted to have a few words with her."  "I'm afraid I don't know when
she's coming in; she usually gets back late when she's been to the
theatre."  "It really doesn't matter," said K. his head hanging as he
turned to the door to leave, "I just wanted to give her my apology for
taking over her room today."  "There's no need for that, Mr. K., you're
too conscientious, the young lady doesn't know anything about it, she
hasn't been home since early this morning and everything's been tidied
up again, you can see for yourself."  And she opened the door to Miss
Bürstner's room.  "Thank you, I'll take your word for it," said K, but
went nonetheless over to the open door.  The moon shone quietly into the
unlit room.  As far as could be seen, everything was indeed in its
place, not even the blouse was hanging on the window handle.  The
pillows on the bed looked remarkably plump as they lay half in the
moonlight.  "Miss Bürstner often comes home late," said K., looking at
Mrs. Grubach as if that were her responsibility.  "That's how young
people are!" said Mrs. Grubach to excuse herself.  "Of course, of
course," said K., "but it can be taken too far."  "Yes, it can be," said
Mrs. Grubach, "you're so right, Mr. K.  Perhaps it is in this case.  I
certainly wouldn't want to say anything nasty about Miss Bürstner, she
is a good, sweet girl, friendly, tidy, punctual, works hard, I
appreciate all that very much, but one thing is true, she ought to have
more pride, be a bit less forthcoming.  Twice this month already, in the
street over the way, I've seen her with a different gentleman.  I really
don't like saying this, you're the only one I've said this to, Mr. K., I
swear to God, but I'm going to have no choice but to have a few words
with Miss Bürstner about it myself.  And it's not the only thing about
her that I'm worried about."  "Mrs. Grubach, you are on quite the wrong
track," said K., so angry that he was hardly able to hide it, "and you
have moreover misunderstood what I was saying about Miss Bürstner, that
is not what I meant.  In fact I warn you quite directly not to say
anything to her, you are quite mistaken, I know Miss Bürstner very well
and there is no truth at all in what you say.  And what's more, perhaps
I'm going to far, I don't want to get in your way, say to her whatever
you see fit.  Good night."  "Mr. K.," said Mrs. Grubach as if asking him
for something and hurrying to his door which he had already opened, "I
don't want to speak to Miss Bürstner at all, not yet, of course I'll
continue to keep an eye on her but you're the only one I've told what I
know.  And it is, after all something that everyone who lets rooms has
to do if she's to keep the house decent, that's all I'm trying to do."
"Decent!" called out K. through the crack in the door, "if you want to
keep the house decent you'll first have to give me notice."  Then he
slammed the door shut, there was a gentle knocking to which he paid no
more attention.

        He did not feel at all like going to bed, so he decided to stay
up, and this would also give him the chance to find out when Miss
Bürstner would arrive home.  Perhaps it would also still be possible,
even if a little inappropriate, to have a few words with her.  As he lay
there by the window, pressing his hands to his tired eyes, he even
thought for a moment that he might punish Mrs. Grubach by persuading
Miss Bürstner to give in her notice at the same time as he would.  But
he immediately realised that that would be shockingly excessive, and
there would even be the suspicion that he was moving house because of
the incidents of that morning.  Nothing would have been more nonsensical
and, above all, more pointless and contemptible.

        When he had become tired of looking out onto the empty street he
slightly opened the door to the living room so that he could see anyone
who entered the flat from where he was and lay down on the couch.  He
lay there, quietly smoking a cigar, until about eleven o'clock.  He
wasn't able to hold out longer than that, and went a little way into the
hallway as if in that way he could make Miss Bürstner arrive sooner.  He
had no particular desire for her, he could not even remember what she
looked like, but now he wanted to speak to her and it irritated him that
her late arrival home meant this day would be full of unease and
disorder right to its very end.  It was also her fault that he had not
had any dinner that evening and that he had been unable to visit Elsa as
he had intended.  He could still make up for both of those things,
though, if he went to the wine bar where Elsa worked.  He wanted to do
so even later, after the discussion with Miss Bürstner.

        It was already gone half past eleven when someone could be heard
in the stairway.  K., who had been lost in his thoughts in the hallway,
walking up and down loudly as if it were his own room, fled behind his
door.  Miss Bürstner had arrived.  Shivering, she pulled a silk shawl
over her slender shoulders as she locked the door.  The next moment she
would certainly go into her room, where K. ought not to intrude in the
middle of the night; that meant he would have to speak to her now, but,
unfortunately, he had not put the electric light on in his room so that
when he stepped out of the dark it would give the impression of being an
attack and would certainly, at the very least, have been quite alarming.
There was no time to lose, and in his helplessness he whispered through
the crack of the door, "Miss Bürstner."  It sounded like he was pleading
with her, not calling to her.  "Is there someone there?" asked Miss
Bürstner, looking round with her eyes wide open.  "It's me," said K. and
came out.  "Oh, Mr. K.!" said Miss Bürstner with a smile. "Good
Evening," and offered him her hand.  "I wanted to have a word with you,
if you would allow me?"  "Now?" asked Miss Bürstner, "does it have to be
now? It is a little odd, isn't it?"  "I've been waiting for you since
nine o'clock."  "Well, I was at the theatre, I didn't know anything
about you waiting for me."  "The reason I need to speak to you only came
up today"  "I see, well I don't see why not, I suppose, apart from being
so tired I could drop.  Come into my room for a few minutes then.  We
certainly can't talk out here, we'd wake everyone up and I think that
would be more unpleasant for us than for them.  Wait here till I've put
the light on in my room, and then turn the light down out here."  K. did
as he was told, and then even waited until Miss Bürstner came out of her
room and quietly invited him, once more, to come in.  "Sit down," she
said, indicating the ottoman, while she herself remained standing by the
bedpost despite the tiredness she had spoken of; she did not even take
off her hat, which was small but decorated with an abundance of flowers.
"What is it you wanted, then?  I'm really quite curious."  She gently
crossed her legs.
"I expect you'll say," K. began, "that the matter really isn't all that
urgent and we don't need to talk about it right now, but ..."  "I never
listen to introductions," said Miss Bürstner.  "That makes my job so
much easier," said K.  "This morning, to some extent through my fault,
your room was made a little untidy, this happened because of people I
did not know and against my will but, as I said, because of my fault; I
wanted to apologise for it."  "My room?" asked Miss Bürstner, and
instead of looking round the room scrutinised K.  "It is true," said K.,
and now, for the first time, they looked each other in the eyes,
"there's no point in saying exactly how this came about."  "But that's
the interesting thing about it," said Miss Bürstner.  "No," said K.
"Well then," said Miss Bürstner, "I don't want to force my way into any
secrets, if you insist that it's of no interest I won't insist.  I'm
quite happy to forgive you for it, as you ask, especially as I can't see
anything at all that's been left untidy."  With her hand laid flat on
her lower hip, she made a tour around the room.  At the mat where the
photographs were she stopped.  "Look at this!" she cried.  "My
photographs really have been put in the wrong places.  Oh, that's
horrible.  Someone really has been in my room without permission."  K.
nodded, and quietly cursed Kaminer who worked at his bank and who was
always active doing things that had neither use nor purpose.  "It is
odd," said Miss Bürstner, "that I'm forced to forbid you to do something
that you ought to have forbidden yourself to do, namely to come into my
room when I'm not here."  "But I did explain to you," said K., and went
over to join her by the photographs, "that it wasn't me who interfered
with your photographs; but as you don't believe me I'll have to admit
that the investigating committee brought along three bank employees with
them, one of them must have touched your photographs and as soon as I
get the chance I'll ask to have him dismissed from the bank.  Yes, there
was an investigating committee here," added K., as the young lady was
looking at him enquiringly.  "Because of you?" she asked.  "Yes,"
answered K.  "No!" the lady cried with a laugh.  "Yes, they were," said
K., "you believe that I'm innocent then, do you?"  "Well now, innocent
..." said the lady, "I don't want to start making any pronouncements
that might have serious consequences, I don't really know you after all,
it means they're dealing with a serious criminal if they send an
investigating committee straight out to get him.  But you're not in
custody now - at least I take it you've not escaped from prison
considering that you seem quite calm - so you can't have committed any
crime of that sort."  "Yes," said K., "but it might be that the
investigating committee could see that I'm innocent, or not so guilty as
had been supposed."  "Yes, that's certainly a possibility," said Miss
Bürstner, who seemed very interested.  "Listen," said K., "you don't
have much experience in legal matters."  "No, that's true, I don't,"
said Miss Bürstner, "and I've often regretted it, as I'd like to know
everything and I'm very interested in legal matters.  There's something
peculiarly attractive about the law, isn't there?  But I'll certainly be
perfecting my knowledge in this area, as next month I start work in a
legal office."  "That's very good," said K., "that means you'll be able
to give me some help with my trial."  "That could well be," said Miss
Bürstner, "why not?  I like to make use of what I know."  "I mean it
quite seriously," said K., "or at least, half seriously, as you do.
This affair is too petty to call in a lawyer, but I could make good use
of someone who could give me advice."  "Yes, but if I'm to give you
advice I'll have to know what it's all about," said Miss Bürstner.
"That's exactly the problem," said K., "I don't know that myself."  "So
you have been making fun of me, then," said Miss Bürstner exceedingly
disappointed, "you really ought not to try something like that on at
this time of night."  And she stepped away from the photographs where
they had stood so long together.  "Miss Bürstner, no," said K., "I'm not
making fun of you.  Please believe me!  I've already told you everything
I know.  More than I know, in fact, as it actually wasn't even an
investigating committee, that's just what I called them because I don't
know what else to call them.  There was no cross questioning at all, I
was merely arrested, but by a committee."  Miss Bürstner sat on the
ottoman and laughed again.  "What was it like then?" she asked.  "It was
terrible" said K., although his mind was no longer on the subject, he
had become totally absorbed by Miss Bürstner's gaze who was supporting
her chin on one hand - the elbow rested on the cushion of the ottoman -
and slowly stroking her hip with the other.  "That's too vague," said
Miss Bürstner.  "What's too vague?" asked K.  Then he remembered himself
and asked, "Would you like me to show you what it was like?"  He wanted
to move in some way but did not want to leave.  "I'm already tired,"
said Miss Bürstner.  "You arrived back so late," said K.  "Now you've
started telling me off.  Well I suppose I deserve it as I shouldn't have
let you in here in the first place, and it turns out there wasn't even
any point."  "Oh, there was a point, you'll see now how important a
point it was," said K.  "May I move this table away from your bedside
and put it here?"  "What do you think you're doing?" said Miss Bürstner.
"Of course you can't!"  "In that case I can't show you," said K., quite
upset, as if Miss Bürstner had committed some incomprehensible offence
against him.  "Alright then, if you need it to show what you mean, just
take the bedside table then," said Miss Bürstner, and after a short
pause added in a weak voice,  "I'm so tired I'm allowing more than I
ought to."  K. put the little table in the middle of the room and sat
down behind it.  "You have to get a proper idea of where the people were
situated, it is very interesting.  I'm the supervisor, sitting over
there on the chest are two policemen, standing next to the photographs
there are three young people.  Hanging on the handle of the window is a
white blouse - I just mention that by the way.  And now it begins.  Ah
yes, I'm forgetting myself, the most important person of all, so I'm
standing here in front of the table.  The supervisor is sitting
extremely comfortably with his legs crossed and his arm hanging over the
backrest here like some layabout.  And now it really does begin.  The
supervisor calls out as if he had to wake me up, in fact he shouts at
me, I'm afraid, if I'm to make it clear to you, I'll have to shout as
well, and it's nothing more than my name that he shouts out."  Miss
Bürstner, laughing as she listened to him, laid her forefinger on her
mouth so that K. would not shout, but it was too late.  K. was too
engrossed in his role and slowly called out, "Josef K.!".  It was not as
loud as he had threatened, but nonetheless, once he had suddenly called
it out, the cry seemed gradually to spread itself all round the room.

